Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced Science Fiction Stories 1953. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


          _It's well established now that the way you put a question
           often determines not only the answer you'll get, but the
           type of answer possible. So ... a mechanical answerer,
           geared to produce the ultimate revelations in reference to
           anything you want to know, might have unsuspected
           limitations._


                       _Ask A Foolish Question_


                         _by_ ROBERT SHECKLEY

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

Answerer was built to last as long as was necessary--which was quite
long, as some races judge time, and not long at all, according to
others. But to Answerer, it was just long enough.

As to size, Answerer was large to some and small to others. He could
be viewed as complex, although some believed that he was really very
simple.

Answerer knew that he was as he should be. Above and beyond all else,
he was The Answerer. He Knew.

Of the race that built him, the less said the better. They also Knew,
and never said whether they found the knowledge pleasant.

They built Answerer as a service to less-sophisticated races, and
departed in a unique manner. Where they went only Answerer knows.

Because Answerer knows everything.

Upon his planet, circling his sun, Answerer sat. Duration continued,
long, as some judge duration, short as others judge it. But as it
should be, to Answerer.

Within him were the Answers. He knew the nature of things, and why
things are as they are, and what they are, and what it all means.

Answerer could answer anything, provided it was a legitimate question.
And he wanted to! He was eager to!

How else should an Answerer be?

What else should an Answerer do?

So he waited for creatures to come and ask.

       *       *       *       *       *

"How do you feel, sir?" Morran asked, floating gently over to the old
man.

"Better," Lingman said, trying to smile. No-weight was a vast relief.
Even though Morran had expended an enormous amount of fuel, getting
into space under minimum acceleration, Lingman's feeble heart hadn't
liked it. Lingman's heart had balked and sulked, pounded angrily
against the brittle rib-case, hesitated and sped up. It seemed for a
time as though Lingman's heart was going to stop, out of sheer pique.

But no-weight was a vast relief, and the feeble heart was going again.

Morran had no such problems. His strong body was built for strain and
stress. He wouldn't experience them on this trip, not if he expected
old Lingman to live.

"I'm going to live," Lingman muttered, in answer to the unspoken
question. "Long enough to find out." Morran touched the controls, and
the ship slipped into sub-space like an eel into oil.

"We'll find out," Morran murmured. He helped the old man unstrap
himself. "We're going to find the Answerer!"

Lingman nodded at his young partner. They had been reassuring
themselves for years. Originally it had been Lingman's project. Then
Morran, graduating from Cal Tech, had joined him. Together they had
traced the rumors across the solar system. The legends of an ancient
humanoid race who had known the answer to all things, and who had
built Answerer and departed.

"Think of it," Morran said. "The answer to everything!" A physicist,
Morran had many questions to ask Answerer. The expanding universe; the
binding force of atomic nuclei; novae and supernovae; planetary
formation; red shift, relativity and a thousand others.

"Yes," Lingman said. He pulled himself to the vision plate and looked
out on the bleak prairie of the illusory sub-space. He was a biologist
and an old man. He had two questions.

What is life?

What is death?

       *       *       *       *       *

After a particularly-long period of hunting purple, Lek and his
friends gathered to talk. Purple always ran thin in the neighborhood
of multiple-cluster stars--why, no one knew--so talk was definitely in
order.

"Do you know," Lek said, "I think I'll hunt up this Answerer." Lek
spoke the Ollgrat language now, the language of imminent decision.

"Why?" Ilm asked him, in the Hvest tongue of light banter. "Why do you
want to know things? Isn't the job of gathering purple enough for
you?"

"No," Lek said, still speaking the language of imminent decision. "It
is not." The great job of Lek and his kind was the gathering of
purple. They found purple imbedded in many parts of the fabric of
space, minute quantities of it. Slowly, they were building a huge
mound of it. What the mound was for, no one knew.

"I suppose you'll ask him what purple is?" Ilm asked, pushing a star
out of his way and lying down.

"I will," Lek said. "We have continued in ignorance too long. We must
know the true nature of purple, and its meaning in the scheme of
things. We must know why it governs our lives." For this speech Lek
switched to Ilgret, the language of incipient-knowledge.

Ilm and the others didn't try to argue, even in the tongue of
arguments. They knew that the knowledge was important. Ever since the
dawn of time, Lek, Ilm and the others had gathered purple. Now it was
time to know the ultimate answers to the universe--what purple was,
and what the mound was for.

And of course, there was the Answerer to tell them. Everyone had heard
of the Answerer, built by a race not unlike themselves, now long
departed.

"Will you ask him anything else?" Ilm asked Lek.

"I don't know," Lek said. "Perhaps I'll ask about the stars. There's
really nothing else important." Since Lek and his brothers had lived
since the dawn of time, they didn't consider death. And since their
numbers were always the same, they didn't consider the question of
life.

But purple? And the mound?

"I go!" Lek shouted, in the vernacular of decision-to-fact.

"Good fortune!" his brothers shouted back, in the jargon of
greatest-friendship.

Lek strode off, leaping from star to star.

       *       *       *       *       *

Alone on his little planet, Answerer sat, waiting for the Questioners.
Occasionally he mumbled the answers to himself. This was his
privilege. He Knew.

But he waited, and the time was neither too long nor too short, for
any of the creatures of space to come and ask.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were eighteen of them, gathered in one place.

"I invoke the rule of eighteen," cried one. And another appeared, who
had never before been, born by the rule of eighteen.

"We must go to the Answerer," one cried. "Our lives are governed by
the rule of eighteen. Where there are eighteen, there will be
nineteen. Why is this so?"

No one could answer.

"Where am I?" asked the newborn nineteenth. One took him aside for
instruction.

That left seventeen. A stable number.

"And we must find out," cried another, "Why all places are different,
although there is no distance."

That was the problem. One is here. Then one is there. Just like that,
no movement, no reason. And yet, without moving, one is in another
place.

"The stars are cold," one cried.

"Why?"

"We must go to the Answerer."

For they had heard the legends, knew the tales. "Once there was a
race, a good deal like us, and they Knew--and they told Answerer. Then
they departed to where there is no place, but much distance."

"How do we get there?" the newborn nineteenth cried, filled now with
knowledge.

"We go." And eighteen of them vanished. One was left. Moodily he
stared at the tremendous spread of an icy star, then he too vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Those old legends are true," Morran gasped. "There it is."

They had come out of sub-space at the place the legends told of, and
before them was a star unlike any other star. Morran invented a
classification for it, but it didn't matter. There was no other like
it.

Swinging around the star was a planet, and this too was unlike any
other planet. Morran invented reasons, but they didn't matter. This
planet was the only one.

"Strap yourself in, sir," Morran said. "I'll land as gently as I can."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lek came to Answerer, striding swiftly from star to star. He lifted
Answerer in his hand and looked at him.

"So you are Answerer," he said.

"Yes," Answerer said.

"Then tell me," Lek said, settling himself comfortably in a gap
between the stars, "Tell me what I am."

"A partiality," Answerer said. "An indication."

"Come now," Lek muttered, his pride hurt. "You can do better than
that. Now then. The purpose of my kind is to gather purple, and to
build a mound of it. Can you tell me the real meaning of this?"

"Your question is without meaning," Answerer said. He knew what purple
actually was, and what the mound was for. But the explanation was
concealed in a greater explanation. Without this, Lek's question was
inexplicable, and Lek had failed to ask the real question.

Lek asked other questions, and Answerer was unable to answer them. Lek
viewed things through his specialized eyes, extracted a part of the
truth and refused to see more. How to tell a blind man the sensation
of green?

Answerer didn't try. He wasn't supposed to.

Finally, Lek emitted a scornful laugh. One of his little
stepping-stones flared at the sound, then faded back to its usual
intensity.

Lek departed, striding swiftly across the stars.

       *       *       *       *       *

Answerer knew. But he had to be asked the proper questions first. He
pondered this limitation, gazing at the stars which were neither large
nor small, but exactly the right size.

The proper questions. The race which built Answerer should have taken
that into account, Answerer thought. They should have made some
allowance for semantic nonsense, allowed him to attempt an
unravelling.

Answerer contented himself with muttering the answers to himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eighteen creatures came to Answerer, neither walking nor flying, but
simply appearing. Shivering in the cold glare of the stars, they gazed
up at the massiveness of Answerer.

"If there is no distance," one asked, "Then how can things be in other
places?"

Answerer knew what distance was, and what places were. But he couldn't
answer the question. There was distance, but not as these creatures
saw it. And there were places, but in a different fashion from that
which the creatures expected.

"Rephrase the question," Answerer said hopefully.

"Why are we short here," one asked, "And long over there? Why are we
fat over there, and short here? Why are the stars cold?"

Answerer knew all things. He knew why stars were cold, but he couldn't
explain it in terms of stars or coldness.

"Why," another asked, "Is there a rule of eighteen? Why, when eighteen
gather, is another produced?"

But of course the answer was part of another, greater question, which
hadn't been asked.

Another was produced by the rule of eighteen, and the nineteen
creatures vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

Answerer mumbled the right questions to himself, and answered them.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We made it," Morran said. "Well, well." He patted Lingman on the
shoulder--lightly, because Lingman might fall apart.

The old biologist was tired. His face was sunken, yellow, lined.
Already the mark of the skull was showing in his prominent yellow
teeth, his small, flat nose, his exposed cheekbones. The matrix was
showing through.

"Let's get on," Lingman said. He didn't want to waste any time. He
didn't have any time to waste.

Helmeted, they walked along the little path.

"Not so fast," Lingman murmured.

"Right," Morran said. They walked together, along the dark path of the
planet that was different from all other planets, soaring alone around
a sun different from all other suns.

"Up here," Morran said. The legends were explicit. A path, leading to
stone steps. Stone steps to a courtyard. And then--the Answerer!

To them, Answerer looked like a white screen set in a wall. To their
eyes, Answerer was very simple.

Lingman clasped his shaking hands together. This was the culmination
of a lifetime's work, financing, arguing, ferreting bits of legend,
ending here, now.

"Remember," he said to Morran, "We will be shocked. The truth will be
like nothing we have imagined."

"I'm ready," Morran said, his eyes rapturous.

"Very well. Answerer," Lingman said, in his thin little voice, "What
is life?"

A voice spoke in their heads. "The question has no meaning. By 'life,'
the Questioner is referring to a partial phenomenon, inexplicable
except in terms of its whole."

"Of what is life a part?" Lingman asked.

"This question, in its present form, admits of no answer. Questioner
is still considering 'life,' from his personal, limited bias."

"Answer it in your own terms, then," Morran said.

"The Answerer can only answer questions." Answerer thought again of
the sad limitation imposed by his builders.

Silence.

"Is the universe expanding?" Morran asked confidently.

"'Expansion' is a term inapplicable to the situation. Universe, as the
Questioner views it, is an illusory concept."

"Can you tell us _anything_?" Morran asked.

"I can answer any valid question concerning the nature of things."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two men looked at each other.

"I think I know what he means," Lingman said sadly. "Our basic
assumptions are wrong. All of them."

"They can't be," Morran said. "Physics, biology--"

"Partial truths," Lingman said, with a great weariness in his voice.
"At least we've determined that much. We've found out that our
inferences concerning observed phenomena are wrong."

"But the rule of the simplest hypothesis--"

"It's only a theory," Lingman said.

"But life--he certainly could answer what life is?"

"Look at it this way," Lingman said. "Suppose you were to ask, 'Why
was I born under the constellation Scorpio, in conjunction with
Saturn?' I would be unable to answer your question _in terms of the
zodiac_, because the zodiac has nothing to do with it."

"I see," Morran said slowly. "He can't answer questions in terms of
our assumptions."

"That seems to be the case. And he can't alter our assumptions. He is
limited to valid questions--which imply, it would seem, a knowledge we
just don't have."

"We can't even ask a valid question?" Morran asked. "I don't believe
that. We must know some basics." He turned to Answerer. "What is
death?"

"I cannot explain an anthropomorphism."

"Death an anthropomorphism!" Morran said, and Lingman turned quickly.
"Now we're getting somewhere!"

"Are anthropomorphisms unreal?" he asked.

"Anthropomorphisms may be classified, tentatively, as, A, false
truths, or B, partial truths in terms of a partial situation."

"Which is applicable here?"

"Both."

That was the closest they got. Morran was unable to draw any more from
Answerer. For hours the two men tried, but truth was slipping farther
and farther away.

"It's maddening," Morran said, after a while. "This thing has the
answer to the whole universe, and he can't tell us unless we ask the
right question. But how are we supposed to know the right question?"

Lingman sat down on the ground, leaning against a stone wall. He
closed his eyes.

"Savages, that's what we are," Morran said, pacing up and down in
front of Answerer. "Imagine a bushman walking up to a physicist and
asking him why he can't shoot his arrow into the sun. The scientist
can explain it only in his own terms. What would happen?"

"The scientist wouldn't even attempt it," Lingman said, in a dim
voice; "he would know the limitations of the questioner."

"It's fine," Morran said angrily. "How do you explain the earth's
rotation to a bushman? Or better, how do you explain relativity to
him--maintaining scientific rigor in your explanation at all times, of
course."

Lingman, eyes closed, didn't answer.

"We're bushmen. But the gap is much greater here. Worm and super-man,
perhaps. The worm desires to know the nature of dirt, and why there's
so much of it. Oh, well."

"Shall we go, sir?" Morran asked. Lingman's eyes remained closed. His
taloned fingers were clenched, his cheeks sunk further in. The skull
was emerging.

"Sir! Sir!"

And Answerer knew that that was not the answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Alone on his planet, which is neither large nor small, but exactly the
right size, Answerer waits. He cannot help the people who come to him,
for even Answerer has restrictions.

He can answer only valid questions.

Universe? Life? Death? Purple? Eighteen?

Partial truths, half-truths, little bits of the great question.

But Answerer, alone, mumbles the questions to himself, the true
questions, which no one can understand.

How could they understand the true answers?

The questions will never be asked, and Answerer remembers something
his builders knew and forgot.

In order to ask a question you must already know most of the answer.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *version by Al Haines.










Copyright (C) 2003 by Robert Sheckley.



Bad Medicine

by Robert Sheckley


On May 2, 2103, Elwood Caswell walked rapidly down Broadway with a
loaded revolver hidden in his coat pocket. He didn't want to use the
weapon, but feared he might anyhow. This was a justifiable assumption,
for Caswell was a homicidal maniac.

It was a gentle, misty spring day and the air held the smell of rain
and blossoming-dogwood. Caswell gripped the revolver in his sweaty
right hand and tried to think of a single valid reason why he should
not kill a man named Magnessen, who, the other day, had commented on
how well Caswell looked.

What business was it of Magnessen's how he looked? Damned busybodies,
always spoiling things for everybody....

Caswell was a choleric little man with fierce red eyes, bulldog jowls
and ginger-red hair. He was the sort you would expect to find perched
on a detergent box, orating to a crowd of lunching businessmen and
amused students, shouting, "Mars for the Martians, Venus for the
Venusians!"

But in truth, Caswell was uninterested in the deplorable social
conditions of extraterrestrials. He was a jetbus conductor for the New
York Rapid Transit Corporation. He minded his own business. And he was
quite mad.

Fortunately, he knew this at least part of the time, with at least half
of his mind.


-- -- -- -- --


Perspiring freely, Caswell continued down Broadway toward the 43rd
Street branch of Home Therapy Appliances, Inc. His friend Magnessen
would be finishing work soon, returning to his little apartment less
than a block from Caswell's. How easy it would be, how pleasant, to
saunter in, exchange a few words and....

No! Caswell took a deep gulp of air and reminded himself that he didn't
really want to kill anyone. It was not right to kill people. The
authorities would lock him up, his friends wouldn't understand, his
mother would never have approved.

But these arguments seemed pallid, over-intellectual and entirely
without force. The simple fact remained--he wanted to kill Magnessen.

Could so strong a desire be wrong? Or even unhealthy?

Yes, it could! With an agonized groan, Caswell sprinted the last few
steps into the Home Therapy Appliances Store.

Just being within such a place gave him an immediate sense of relief.
The lighting was discreet, the draperies were neutral, the displays of
glittering therapy machines were neither too bland nor obstreperous. It
was the kind of place where a man could happily lie down on the carpet
in the shadow of the therapy machines, secure in the knowledge that
help for any sort of trouble was at hand.

A clerk with fair hair and a long, supercilious nose glided up softly,
but not too softly, and murmured, "May one help?"

"Therapy!" said Caswell.

"Of course, sir," the clerk answered, smoothing his lapels and smiling
winningly. "That is what we are here for." He gave Caswell a searching
look, performed an instant mental diagnosis, and tapped a gleaming
white-and-copper machine.

"Now this," the clerk said, "is the new Alcoholic Reliever, built by
IBM and advertised in the leading magazines. A handsome piece of
furniture, I think you will agree, and not out of place in any home. It
opens into a television set."

With a flick of his narrow wrist, the clerk opened the Alcoholic
Reliever, revealing a 52-inch screen.

"I need--" Caswell began.

"Therapy," the clerk finished for him. "Of course. I just wanted to
point out that this model need never cause embarrassment for yourself,
your friends or loved ones. Notice, if you will, the recessed dial
which controls the desired degree of drinking. See? If you do not wish
total abstinence, you can set it to heavy, moderate, social or light.
That is a new feature, unique in mechanotherapy."

"I am not an alcoholic," Caswell said, with considerable dignity. "The
New York Rapid Transit Corporation does not hire alcoholics."

"Oh," said the clerk, glancing distrustfully at Caswell's bloodshot
eyes. "You seem a little nervous. Perhaps the portable Bendix Anxiety
Reducer--"

"Anxiety's not my ticket, either. What have you got for homicidal
mania?"

The clerk pursed his lips. "Schizophrenic or manic-depressive origins?"

"I don't know," Caswell admitted, somewhat taken aback.

"It really doesn't matter," the clerk told him. "Just a private theory
of my own. From my experience in the store, redheads and blonds are
prone to schizophrenia, while brunettes incline toward the
manic-depressive."

"That's interesting. Have you worked here long?"

"A week. Now then, here is just what you need, sir." He put his hand
affectionately on a squat black machine with chrome trim.

"What's that?"

"That, sir, is the Rex Regenerator, built by General Motors. Isn't it
handsome? It can go with any decor and opens up into a well-stocked
bar. Your friends, family, loved ones need never know--"

"Will it cure a homicidal urge?" Caswell asked. "A strong one?"

"Absolutely. Don't confuse this with the little ten amp neurosis
models. This is a hefty, heavy-duty, twenty-five amp machine for a
really deep-rooted major condition."

"That's what I've got," said Caswell, with pardonable pride.

"This baby'll jolt it out of you. Big, heavy-duty thrust bearings!
Oversize heat absorbers! Completely insulated! Sensitivity range of over--"

"I'll take it," Caswell said. "Right now. I'll pay cash."

"Fine! I'll just telephone Storage and--"

"This one'll do," Caswell said, pulling out his billfold. "I'm in a
hurry to use it. I want to kill my friend Magnessen, you know."

The clerk clucked sympathetically. "You wouldn't want to do that ... Plus
five percent sales tax. Thank you, sir. Full instructions are inside."

Caswell thanked him, lifted the Regenerator in both arms and hurried
out.

After figuring his commission, the clerk smiled to himself and lighted
a cigarette. His enjoyment was spoiled when the manager, a large man
impressively equipped with pince-nez, marched out of his office.

"Haskins," the manager said, "I thought I asked you to rid yourself of
that filthy habit."

"Yes, Mr. Follansby, sorry, sir," Haskins apologized, snubbing out the
cigarette. "I'll use the display Denicotinizer at once. Made rather a
good sale, Mr. Follansby. One of the big Rex Regenerators."

"Really?" said the manager, impressed. "It isn't often we--wait a minute!
You didn't sell the floor model, did you?"

"Why--why, I'm afraid I did, Mr. Follansby. The customer was in such a
terrible hurry. Was there any reason--"

Mr. Follansby gripped his prominent white forehead in both hands, as
though he wished to rip it off. "Haskins, I told you. I must have told
you! That display Regenerator was a Martian model. For giving
mechanotherapy to Martians."

"Oh," Haskins said. He thought for a moment. "Oh."

Mr. Follansby stared at his clerk in grim silence.

"But does it really matter?" Haskins asked quickly. "Surely the machine
won't discriminate. I should think it would treat a homicidal tendency
even if the patient were not a Martian."

"The Martian race has never had the slightest tendency toward homicide.
A Martian Regenerator doesn't even process the concept. Of course the
Regenerator will treat him. It has to. But what will it treat?"

"Oh," said Haskins.

"That poor devil must be stopped before--you say he was homicidal? I don't
know what will happen! Quick, what is his address?"

"Well, Mr. Follansby, he was in such a terrible hurry--"

The manager gave him a long, unbelieving look. "Get the police! Call
the General Motors Security Division! Find him!"

Haskins raced for the door.

"Wait!" yelled the manager, struggling into a raincoat. "I'm coming,
too."


-- -- -- -- --


Elwood Caswell returned to his apartment by taxicopter. He lugged the
Regenerator into his living room, put it down near the couch and
studied it thoughtfully.

"That clerk was right," he said after a while. "It does go with the
room."

Esthetically, the Regenerator was a success.

Caswell admired it for a few more moments, then went into the kitchen
and fixed himself a chicken sandwich. He ate slowly, staring fixedly at
a point just above and to the left of his kitchen clock.

Damn you, Magnessen! Dirty no-good lying shifty-eyed enemy of all
that's decent and clean in the world....

Taking the revolver from his pocket, he laid it on the table. With a
stiffened forefinger, he poked it into different positions.

It was time to begin therapy.

Except that....

Caswell realized worriedly that he didn't want to lose the desire to
kill Magnessen. What would become of him if he lost that urge? His life
would lose all purpose, all coherence, all flavor and zest. It would be
quite dull, really.

Moreover, he had a great and genuine grievance against Magnessen, one
he didn't like to think about.

Irene!

His poor sister, debauched by the subtle and insidious Magnessen,
ruined by him and cast aside. What better reason could a man have to
take his revolver and....

Caswell finally remembered that he did not have a sister.

Now was really the time to begin therapy.

He went into the living room and found the operating instructions
tucked into a ventilation louver of the machine. He opened them and
read:

To Operate All Rex Model Regenerators:

1. Place the Regenerator near a comfortable couch. (A comfortable couch
can be purchased as an additional accessory from any General Motors
dealer.)

2. Plug in the machine.

3. Affix the adjustable contact-band to the forehead.

And that's all! Your Regenerator will do the rest! There will be no
language bar or dialect problem, since the Regenerator communicates by
Direct Sense Contact (Patent Pending). All you must do is cooperate.

Try not to feel any embarrassment or shame. Everyone has problems and
many are worse than yours! Your Regenerator has no interest in your
morals or ethical standards, so don't feel it is 'judging' you. It
desires only to aid you in becoming well and happy.

As soon as it has collected and processed enough data, your Regenerator
will begin treatment. You make the sessions as short or as long as you
like. You are the boss! And of course you can end a session at any time.

That's all there is to it! Simple, isn't it? Now plug in your General
Motors Regenerator and GET SANE!


-- -- -- -- --


"Nothing hard about that," Caswell said to himself. He pushed the
Regenerator closer to the couch and plugged it in. He lifted the
headband, started to slip it on, stopped.

"I feel so silly!" he giggled.

Abruptly he closed his mouth and stared pugnaciously at the
black-and-chrome machine.

"So you think you can make me sane, huh?"

The Regenerator didn't answer.

"Oh, well, go ahead and try." He slipped the headband over his
forehead, crossed his arms on his chest and leaned back.

Nothing happened. Caswell settled himself more comfortably on the
couch. He scratched his shoulder and put the headband at a more
comfortable angle. Still nothing. His thoughts began to wander.

Magnessen! You noisy, overbearing oaf, you disgusting--

"Good afternoon," a voice murmured in his head. "I am your
mechanotherapist."

Caswell twitched guiltily. "Hello. I was just--you know, just sort of--"

"Of course," the machine said soothingly. "Don't we all? I am now
scanning the material in your preconscious with the intent of
synthesis, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. I find...."

"Yes?"

"Just one moment." The Regenerator was silent for several minutes.
Then, hesitantly, it said, "This is beyond doubt a most unusual case."

"Really?" Caswell asked, pleased.

"Yes. The coefficients seem--I'm not sure...." The machine's robotic
voice grew feeble. The pilot light began to flicker and fade.

"Hey, what's the matter?"

"Confusion," said the machine. "Of course," it went on in a stronger
voice, "the unusual nature of the symptoms need not prove entirely
baffling to a competent therapeutic machine. A symptom, no matter how
bizarre, is no more than a signpost, an indication of inner difficulty.
And all symptoms can be related to the broad mainstream of proven
theory. Since the theory is effective, the symptoms must relate. We
will proceed on that assumption."

"Are you sure you know what you're doing?" asked Caswell, feeling
lightheaded.

The machine snapped back, its pilot light blazing. "Mechanotherapy
today is an exact science and admits no significant errors. We will
proceed with a word-association test."

"Fire away," said Caswell.

"House?"

"Home."

"Dog?"

"Cat."

"Fleefl?"

Caswell hesitated, trying to figure out the word. It sounded vaguely
Martian, but it might be Venusian or even--

"Fleefl?" the Regenerator repeated.

"Marfoosh," Caswell replied, making up the word on the spur of the
moment.

"Loud?"

"Sweet."

"Green?"

"Mother."

"Thanagoyes?"

"Patamathonga."

"Arrides?"

"Nexothesmodrastica."

"Chtheesnohelgnopteces?"

"Rigamaroo latasentricpropatria!" Caswell shot back. It was a
collection of sounds he was particularly proud of. The average man
would not have been able to pronounce them.

"Hmm," said the Regenerator. "The pattern fits. It always does."

"What pattern?"

"You have," the machine informed him, "a classic case of feem desire,
complicated by strong dwarkish intentions."

"I do? I thought I was homicidal."

"That term has no referent," the machine said severely. "Therefore I
must reject it as nonsense syllabification. Now consider these points:
The feem desire is perfectly normal. Never forget that. But it is
usually replaced at an early age by the hovendish revulsion.
Individuals lacking in this basic environmental response--"

"I'm not absolutely sure I know what you're talking about," Caswell
confessed.

"Please, sir! We must establish one thing at once. You are the patient.
I am the mechanotherapist. You have brought your troubles to me for
treatment. But you cannot expect help unless you cooperate."

"All right," Caswell said. "I'll try."

Up to now, he had been bathed in a warm glow of superiority. Everything
the machine said had seemed mildly humorous. As a matter of fact, he
had felt capable of pointing out a few things wrong with the
mechanotherapist.

Now that sense of well-being evaporated, as it always did, and Caswell
was alone, terribly alone and lost, a creature of his compulsions, in
search of a little peace and contentment.

He would undergo anything to find them. Sternly he reminded himself
that he had no right to comment on the mechanotherapist. These machines
knew what they were doing and had been doing it for a long time. He
would cooperate, no matter how outlandish the treatment seemed from his
layman's viewpoint.

But it was obvious, Caswell thought, settling himself grimly on the
couch, that mechanotherapy was going to be far more difficult than he
had imagined.


-- -- -- -- --


The search for the missing customer had been brief and useless. He was
nowhere to be found on the teeming New York streets and no one could
remember seeing a red-haired, red-eyed little man lugging a black
therapeutic machine.

It was all too common a sight.

In answer to an urgent telephone call, the police came immediately,
four of them, led by a harassed young lieutenant of detectives named
Smith.

Smith just had time to ask, "Say, why don't you people put tags on
things?" when there was an interruption.

A man pushed his way past the policeman at the door. He was tall and
gnarled and ugly, and his eyes were deep-set and bleakly blue. His
clothes, unpressed and uncaring, hung on him like corrugated iron.

"What do you want?" Lieutenant Smith asked.

The ugly man flipped back his lapel, showing a small silver badge
beneath. "I'm John Rath, General Motors Security Division."

"Oh ... Sorry, sir," Lieutenant Smith said, saluting. "I didn't think you
people would move in so fast."

Rath made a noncommittal noise. "Have you checked for prints,
Lieutenant? The customer might have touched some other therapy machine."

"I'll get right on it, sir," Smith said. It wasn't often that one of
the operatives from GM, GE, or IBM came down to take a personal hand.
If a local cop showed he was really clicking, there just might be the
possibility of an Industrial Transfer....

Rath turned to Follansby and Haskins, and transfixed them with a gaze
as piercing and as impersonal as a radar beam. "Let's have the full
story," he said, taking a notebook and pencil from a shapeless pocket.

He listened to the tale in ominous silence. Finally he closed his
notebook, thrust it back into his pocket and said, "The therapeutic
machines are a sacred trust. To give a customer the wrong machine is a
betrayal of that trust, a violation of the Public Interest, and a
defamation of the Company's good reputation."

The manager nodded in agreement, glaring at his unhappy clerk.

"A Martian model," Rath continued, "should never have been on the floor
in the first place."

"I can explain that," Follansby said hastily. "We needed a demonstrator
model and I wrote to the Company, telling them--"

"This might," Rath broke in inexorably, "be considered a case of gross
criminal negligence."

Both the manager and the clerk exchanged horrified looks. They were
thinking of the General Motors Reformatory outside of Detroit, where
Company offenders passed their days in sullen silence, monotonously
drawing microcircuits for pocket television sets.

"However, that is out of my jurisdiction," Rath said. He turned his
baleful gaze full upon Haskins. "You are certain that the customer
never mentioned his name?"

"No, sir. I mean yes, I'm sure," Haskins replied rattledly.

"Did he mention any names at all?"

Haskins plunged his face into his hands. He looked up and said eagerly,
"Yes! He wanted to kill someone! A friend of his!"

"Who?" Rath asked, with terrible patience.

"The friend's name was--let me think--Magneton! That was it! Magneton!
Or was it Morrison? Oh, dear...."

Mr. Rath's iron face registered a rather corrugated disgust. People
were useless as witnesses. Worse than useless, since they were
frequently misleading. For reliability, give him a robot every time.

"Didn't he mention anything significant?"

"Let me think!" Haskins said, his face twisting into a fit of
concentration.

Rath waited.

Mr. Follansby cleared his throat. "I was just thinking, Mr. Rath. About
that Martian machine. It won't treat a Terran homicidal case as
homicidal, will it?"

"Of course not. Homicide is unknown on Mars."

"Yes. But what will it do? Might it not reject the entire case as
unsuitable? Then the customer would merely return the Regenerator with
a complaint and we would--"

Mr. Rath shook his head. "The Rex Regenerator must treat if it finds
evidence of psychosis. By Martian standards, the customer is a very
sick man, a psychotic--no matter what is wrong with him."

Follansby removed his pince-nez and polished them rapidly. "What will
the machine do, then?"

"It will treat him for the Martian illness most analogous to his case.
Feem desire, I should imagine, with various complications. As for what
will happen once treatment begins, I don't know. I doubt whether anyone
knows, since it has never happened before. Offhand, I would say there
are two major alternatives: the patient may reject the therapy out of
hand, in which case he is left with his homicidal mania unabated. Or he
may accept the Martian therapy and reach a cure."

Mr. Follansby's face brightened. "Ah! A cure is possible!"

"You don't understand," Rath said. "He may effect a cure of his
nonexistent Martian psychosis. But to cure something that is not there
is, in effect, to erect a gratuitous delusional system. You might say
that the machine would work in reverse, producing psychosis instead of
removing it."

Mr. Follansby groaned and leaned against a Bell Psychosomatica.

"The result," Rath summed up, "would be to convince the customer that
he was a Martian. A sane Martian, naturally."

Haskins suddenly shouted, "I remember! I remember now! He said he
worked for the New York Rapid Transit Corporation! I remember
distinctly!"

"That's a break," Rath said, reaching for the telephone.

Haskins wiped his perspiring face in relief. "And I just remembered
something else that should make it easier still."

"What?"

"The customer said he had been an alcoholic at one time. I'm sure of
it, because he was interested at first in the IBM Alcoholic Reliever,
until I talked him out of it. He had red hair, you know, and I've had a
theory for some time about red-headedness and alcoholism. It seems--"

"Excellent," Rath said. "Alcoholism will be on his records. It narrows
the search considerably."

As he dialed the NYRT Corporation, the expression on his craglike face
was almost pleasant.

It was good, for a change, to find that a human could retain some
significant facts.


-- -- -- -- --


"But surely you remember your goricae?" the Regenerator was saying.

"No," Caswell answered wearily.

"Tell me, then, about your juvenile experiences with the thorastrian
fleep."

"Never had any."

"Hmm. Blockage," muttered the machine. "Resentment. Repression. Are you
sure you don't remember your goricae and what it meant to you? The
experience is universal."

"Not for me," Caswell said, swallowing a yawn.

He had been undergoing mechanotherapy for close to four hours and it
struck him as futile. For a while, he had talked voluntarily about his
childhood, his mother and father, his older brother. But the
Regenerator had asked him to put aside those fantasies. The patient's
relationships to an imaginary parent or sibling, it explained, were
unworkable and of minor importance psychologically. The important thing
was the patient's feelings--both revealed and repressed--toward his
goricae.

"Aw, look," Caswell complained, "I don't even know what a goricae is."

"Of course you do. You just won't let yourself know."

"I don't know. Tell me."

"It would be better if you told me."

"How can I?" Caswell raged. "I don't know!"

"What do you imagine a goricae would be?"

"A forest fire," Caswell said. "A salt tablet. A jar of denatured
alcohol. A small screwdriver. Am I getting warm? A notebook. A revolver--"

"These associations are meaningful," the Regenerator assured him. "Your
attempt at randomness shows a clearly underlying pattern. Do you begin
to recognize it?"

"What in hell is a goricae?" Caswell roared.

"The tree that nourished you during infancy, and well into puberty, if
my theory about you is correct. Inadvertently, the goricae stifled your
necessary rejection of the feem desire. This in turn gave rise to your
present urge to dwark someone in a vlendish manner."

"No tree nourished me."

"You cannot recall the experience?"

"Of course not. It never happened."

"You are sure of that?"

"Positive."

"Not even the tiniest bit of doubt?"

"No! No goricae ever nourished me. Look, I can break off these sessions
at any time, right?"

"Of course," the Regenerator said. "But it would not be advisable at
this moment. You are expressing anger, resentment, fear. By your
rigidly summary rejection--"

"Nuts," said Caswell, and pulled off the headband.


-- -- -- -- --


The silence was wonderful. Caswell stood up, yawned, stretched and
massaged the back of his neck. He stood in front of the humming black
machine and gave it a long leer.

"You couldn't cure me of a common cold," he told it.

Stiffly he walked the length of the living room and returned to the
Regenerator.

"Lousy fake!" he shouted.

Caswell went into the kitchen and opened a bottle of beer. His revolver
was still on the table, gleaming dully.

Magnessen! You unspeakable treacherous filth! You fiend incarnate! You
inhuman, hideous monster! Someone must destroy you, Magnessen! Someone....

Someone? He himself would have to do it. Only he knew the bottomless
depths of Magnessen's depravity, his viciousness, his disgusting lust
for power.

Yes, it was his duty, Caswell thought. But strangely, the knowledge
brought him no pleasure.

After all, Magnessen was his friend.

He stood up, ready for action. He tucked the revolver into his
right-hand coat pocket and glanced at the kitchen clock. Nearly
six-thirty. Magnessen would be home now, gulping his dinner, grinning
over his plans.

This was the perfect time to take him.

Caswell strode to the door, opened it, started through, and stopped.

A thought had crossed his mind, a thought so tremendously involved, so
meaningful, so far-reaching in its implications that he was stirred to
his depths. Caswell tried desperately to shake off the knowledge it
brought. But the thought, permanently etched upon his memory, would not
depart.

Under the circumstances, he could do only one thing.

He returned to the living room, sat down on the couch and slipped on
the headband.

The Regenerator said, "Yes?"

"It's the damnedest thing," Caswell said, "but do you know, I think I
do remember my goricae!"


-- -- -- -- --


John Rath contacted the New York Rapid Transit Corporation by televideo
and was put into immediate contact with Mr. Bemis, a plump, tanned man
with watchful eyes.

"Alcoholism?" Mr. Bemis repeated, after the problem was explained.
Unobtrusively, he turned on his tape recorder. "Among our employees?"
Pressing a button beneath his foot, Bemis alerted Transit Security,
Publicity, Intercompany Relations, and the Psychoanalysis Division.
This done, he looked earnestly at Rath. "Not a chance of it, my dear
sir. Just between us, why does General Motors really want to know?"

Rath smiled bitterly. He should have anticipated this. NYRT and GM had
had their differences in the past. Officially, there was cooperation
between the two giant corporations. But for all practical purposes--

"The question is in terms of the Public Interest," Rath said.

"Oh, certainly," Mr. Bemis replied, with a subtle smile. Glancing at
his tattle board, he noticed that several company executives had tapped
in on his line. This might mean a promotion, if handled properly.

"The Public Interest of GM," Mr. Bemis added with polite nastiness.
"The insinuation is, I suppose, that drunken conductors are operating
our jetbuses and helis?"

"Of course not. I was searching for a single alcoholic predilection, an
individual latency--"

"There's no possibility of it. We at Rapid Transit do not hire people
with even the merest tendency in that direction. And may I suggest,
sir, that you clean your own house before making implications about
others?"

And with that, Mr. Bemis broke the connection.

No one was going to put anything over on him.

"Dead end," Rath said heavily. He turned and shouted, "Smith! Did you
find any prints?"

Lieutenant Smith, his coat off and sleeves rolled up, bounded over.
"Nothing usable, sir."

Rath's thin lips tightened. It had been close to seven hours since the
customer had taken the Martian machine. There was no telling what harm
had been done by now. The customer would be justified in bringing suit
against the Company. Not that the money mattered much; it was the bad
publicity that was to be avoided at all costs.

"Beg pardon, sir," Haskins said.

Rath ignored him. What next? Rapid Transit was not going to cooperate.
Would the Armed Services make their records available for scansion by
somatotype and pigmentation?

"Sir," Haskins said again.

"What is it?"

"I just remembered the customer's friend's name. It was Magnessen."

"Are you sure of that?"

"Absolutely," Haskins said, with the first confidence he had shown in
hours. "I've taken the liberty of looking him up in the telephone book,
sir. There's only one Manhattan listing under that name."

Rath glowered at him from under shaggy eyebrows. "Haskins, I hope you
are not wrong about this. I sincerely hope that."

"I do too, sir," Haskins admitted, feeling his knees begin to shake.

"Because if you are," Rath said, "I will ... Never mind. Let's go!"


-- -- -- -- --


By police escort, they arrived at the address in fifteen minutes. It
was an ancient brownstone and Magnessen's name was on a second-floor
door. They knocked.

The door opened and a stocky, crop-headed, shirt-sleeved man in his
thirties stood before them. He turned slightly pale at the sight of so
many uniforms, but held his ground.

"What is this?" he demanded.

"You Magnessen?" Lieutenant Smith barked.

"Yeah. What's the beef? If it's about my hi-fi playing too loud, I can
tell you that old hag downstairs--"

"May we come in?" Rath asked. "It's important."

Magnessen seemed about to refuse, so Rath pushed past him, followed by
Smith, Follansby, Haskins, and a small army of policemen. Magnessen
turned to face them, bewildered, defiant and more than a little awed.

"Mr. Magnessen," Rath said, in the pleasantest voice he could muster,
"I hope you'll forgive the intrusion. Let me assure you, it is in the
Public Interest, as well as your own. Do you know a short,
angry-looking, red-haired, red-eyed man?"

"Yes," Magnessen said slowly and warily.

Haskins let out a sigh of relief.

"Would you tell us his name and address?" asked Rath.

"I suppose you mean--hold it! What's he done?"

"Nothing."

"Then what you want him for?"

"There's no time for explanations," Rath said. "Believe me, it's in his
own best interest, too. What is his name?"

Magnessen studied Rath's ugly, honest face, trying to make up his mind.

Lieutenant Smith said, "Come on, talk, Magnessen, if you know what's
good for you. We want the name and we want it quick."

It was the wrong approach. Magnessen lighted a cigarette, blew smoke in
Smith's direction and inquired, "You got a warrant, buddy?"

"You bet I have," Smith said, striding forward. "I'll warrant you, wise
guy."

"Stop it!" Rath ordered. "Lieutenant Smith, thank you for your
assistance. I won't need you any longer."

Smith left sulkily, taking his platoon with him.

Rath said, "I apologize for Smith's over-eagerness. You had better hear
the problem." Briefly but fully, he told the story of the customer and
the Martian therapeutic machine.

When he was finished, Magnessen looked more suspicious than ever. "You
say he wants to kill me?"

"Definitely."

"That's a lie! I don't know what your game is, mister, but you'll never
make me believe that. Elwood's my best friend. We been best friends
since we was kids. We been in service together. Elwood would cut off
his arm for me. And I'd do the same for him."

"Yes, yes," Rath said impatiently, "in a sane frame of mind, he would.
But your friend Elwood--is that his first name or last?"

"First," Magnessen said tauntingly.

"Your friend Elwood is psychotic."

"You don't know him. That guy loves me like a brother. Look, what's
Elwood really done? Defaulted on some payments or something? I can help
out."

"You thickheaded imbecile!" Rath shouted. "I'm trying to save your
life, and the life and sanity of your friend!"

"But how do I know?" Magnessen pleaded. "You guys come busting in here--"

"You can trust me," Rath said.

Magnessen studied Rath's face and nodded sourly. "His name's Elwood
Caswell. He lives just down the block at number 341."


-- -- -- -- --


The man who came to the door was short, with red hair and red-rimmed
eyes. His right hand was thrust into his coat pocket. He seemed very
calm.

"Are you Elwood Caswell?" Rath asked. "The Elwood Caswell who bought a
Regenerator early this afternoon at the Home Therapy Appliances Store?"

"Yes," said Caswell. "Won't you come in?"

Inside Caswell's small living room, they saw the Regenerator,
glistening black and chrome, standing near the couch. It was unplugged.

"Have you used it?" Rath asked anxiously.

"Yes."

Follansby stepped forward. "Mr. Caswell, I don't know how to explain
this, but we made a terrible mistake. The Regenerator you took was a
Martian model--for giving therapy to Martians."

"I know," said Caswell.

"You do?"

"Of course. It became pretty obvious after a while."

"It was a dangerous situation," Rath said. "Especially for a man with
your--ah--troubles." He studied Caswell covertly. The man seemed fine, but
appearances were frequently deceiving, especially with psychotics.
Caswell had been homicidal; there was no reason why he should not still
be.

And Rath began to wish he had not dismissed Smith and his policemen so
summarily. Sometimes an armed squad was a comforting thing to have
around.

Caswell walked across the room to the therapeutic machine. One hand was
still in his jacket pocket; the other he laid affectionately upon the
Regenerator.

"The poor thing tried its best," he said. "Of course, it couldn't cure
what wasn't there." He laughed. "But it came very near succeeding!"


-- -- -- -- --


Rath studied Caswell's face and said, in a trained, casual tone, "Glad
there was no harm, sir. The Company will, of course, reimburse you for
your lost time and for your mental anguish--"

"Naturally," Caswell said.

"--and we will substitute a proper Terran Regenerator at once."

"That won't be necessary."

"It won't?"

"No." Caswell's voice was decisive. "The machine's attempt at therapy
forced me into a compete self-appraisal. There was a moment of absolute
insight, during which I was able to evaluate and discard my homicidal
intentions toward poor Magnessen."

Rath nodded dubiously. "You feel no such urge now?"

"Not in the slightest."

Rath frowned deeply, started to say something, and stopped. He turned
to Follansby and Haskins. "Get that machine out of here. I'll have a
few things to say to you at the store."

The manager and the clerk lifted the Regenerator and left.

Rath took a deep breath. "Mr. Caswell, I would strongly advise that you
accept a new Regenerator from the Company, gratis. Unless a cure is
effected in a proper mechanotherapeutic manner, there is always the
danger of a setback."

"No danger with me," Caswell said, airily but with deep conviction.
"Thank you for your consideration, sir. And good night."

Rath shrugged and walked to the door.

"Wait!" Caswell called.

Rath turned. Caswell had taken his hand out of his pocket. In it was a
revolver. Rath felt sweat trickle down his arms. He calculated the
distance between himself and Caswell. Too far.

"Here," Caswell said, extending the revolver butt-first. "I won't need
this any longer."

Rath managed to keep his face expressionless as he accepted the
revolver and stuck it into a shapeless pocket.

"Good night," Caswell said. He closed the door behind Rath and bolted
it.

At last he was alone.

Caswell walked into the kitchen. He opened a bottle of beer, took a
deep swallow and sat down at the kitchen table. He stared fixedly at a
point just above and to the left of the clock.

He had to form his plans now. There was no time to lose.

Magnessen! That inhuman monster who cut down the Caswell goricae!
Magnessen! The man who, even now, was secretly planning to infect New
York with the abhorrent feem desire! Oh, Magnessen, I wish you a long,
long life, filled with the torture I can inflict on you. And to start
with....

Caswell smiled to himself as he planned exactly how he would dwark
Magnessen in a vlendish manner.


The EndBESIDE
 STILL
 WATERS

                                                    BY ROBERT SHECKLEY


    _When people talk about getting away from it all, they are usually
    thinking about our great open spaces out west. But to science
    fiction writers, that would be practically in the heart of Times
    Square. When a man of the future wants solitude he picks a slab of
    rock floating in space four light years east of Andromeda. Here is a
    gentle little story about a man who sought the solitude of such a
    location. And who did he take along for company? None other than
    Charles the Robot._


Mark Rogers was a prospector, and he went to the asteroid belt looking
for radioactives and rare metals. He searched for years, never finding
much, hopping from fragment to fragment. After a time he settled on a
slab of rock half a mile thick.

Rogers had been born old, and he didn't age much past a point. His face
was white with the pallor of space, and his hands shook a little. He
called his slab of rock Martha, after no girl he had ever known.

He made a little strike, enough to equip Martha with an air pump and a
shack, a few tons of dirt and some water tanks, and a robot. Then he
settled back and watched the stars.

The robot he bought was a standard-model all-around worker, with
built-in memory and a thirty-word vocabulary. Mark added to that, bit
by bit. He was something of a tinkerer, and he enjoyed adapting his
environment to himself.

At first, all the robot could say was "Yes, sir," and "No, sir." He
could state simple problems: "The air pump is laboring, sir." "The corn
is budding, sir." He could perform a satisfactory salutation: "Good
morning, sir."

Mark changed that. He eliminated the "sirs" from the robot's vocabulary;
equality was the rule on Mark's hunk of rock. Then he dubbed the robot
Charles, after a father he had never known.

As the years passed, the air pump began to labor a little as it
converted the oxygen in the planetoid's rock into a breathable
atmosphere. The air seeped into space, and the pump worked a little
harder, supplying more.

The crops continued to grow on the tamed black dirt of the planetoid.
Looking up, Mark could see the sheer blackness of the river of space,
the floating points of the stars. Around him, under him, overhead,
masses of rock drifted, and sometimes the starlight glinted from their
black sides. Occasionally, Mark caught a glimpse of Mars or Jupiter.
Once he thought he saw Earth.

Mark began to tape new responses into Charles. He added simple responses
to cue words. When he said, "How does it look?" Charles would answer,
"Oh, pretty good, I guess."

At first the answers were what Mark had been answering himself, in the
long dialogue held over the years. But, slowly, he began to build a new
personality into Charles.

Mark had always been suspicious and scornful of women. But for some
reason he didn't tape the same suspicion into Charles. Charles' outlook
was quite different.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What do you think of girls?" Mark would ask, sitting on a packing case
outside the shack, after the chores were done.

"Oh, I don't know. You have to find the right one." The robot would
reply dutifully, repeating what had been put on its tape.

"I never saw a good one yet," Mark would say.

"Well, that's not fair. Perhaps you didn't look long enough. There's a
girl in the world for every man."

"You're a romantic!" Mark would say scornfully. The robot would pause--a
built-in pause--and chuckle a carefully constructed chuckle.

"I dreamed of a girl named Martha once," Charles would say. "Maybe if I
would have looked, I would have found her."

And then it would be bedtime. Or perhaps Mark would want more
conversation. "What do you think of girls?" he would ask again, and
the discussion would follow its same course.

[Illustration]

Charles grew old. His limbs lost their flexibility, and some of his
wiring started to corrode. Mark would spend hours keeping the robot in
repair.

"You're getting rusty," he would cackle.

"You're not so young yourself," Charles would reply. He had an answer
for almost everything. Nothing involved, but an answer.

It was always night on Martha, but Mark broke up his time into mornings,
afternoons and evenings. Their life followed a simple routine.
Breakfast, from vegetables and Mark's canned store. Then the robot would
work in the fields, and the plants grew used to his touch. Mark would
repair the pump, check the water supply, and straighten up the
immaculate shack. Lunch, and the robot's chores were usually finished.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two would sit on the packing case and watch the stars. They would
talk until supper, and sometimes late into the endless night.

In time, Mark built more complicated conversations into Charles. He
couldn't give the robot free choice, of course, but he managed a pretty
close approximation of it. Slowly, Charles' personality emerged. But it
was strikingly different from Mark's.

Where Mark was querulous, Charles was calm. Mark was sardonic, Charles
was naive. Mark was a cynic, Charles was an idealist. Mark was often
sad; Charles was forever content.

And in time, Mark forgot he had built the answers into Charles. He
accepted the robot as a friend, of about his own age. A friend of long
years' standing.

"The thing I don't understand," Mark would say, "is why a man like you
wants to live here. I mean, it's all right for me. No one cares about
me, and I never gave much of a damn about anyone. But why you?"

"Here I have a whole world," Charles would reply, "where on Earth I had
to share with billions. I have the stars, bigger and brighter than on
Earth. I have all space around me, close, like still waters. And I have
you, Mark."

"Now, don't go getting sentimental on me--"

"I'm not. Friendship counts. Love was lost long ago, Mark. The love of a
girl named Martha, whom neither of us ever met. And that's a pity. But
friendship remains, and the eternal night."

"You're a bloody poet," Mark would say, half admiringly. "A poor poet."

       *       *       *       *       *

Time passed unnoticed by the stars, and the air pump hissed and clanked
and leaked. Mark was fixing it constantly, but the air of Martha became
increasingly rare. Although Charles labored in the fields, the crops,
deprived of sufficient air, died.

Mark was tired now, and barely able to crawl around, even without the
grip of gravity. He stayed in his bunk most of the time. Charles fed him
as best he could, moving on rusty, creaking limbs.

"What do you think of girls?"

"I never saw a good one yet."

"Well, that's not fair."

Mark was too tired to see the end coming, and Charles wasn't interested.
But the end was on its way. The air pump threatened to give out
momentarily. There hadn't been any food for days.

[Illustration]

"But why you?" Gasping in the escaping air. Strangling.

"Here I have a whole world--"

"Don't get sentimental--"

"And the love of a girl named Martha."

From his bunk Mark saw the stars for the last time. Big, bigger than
ever, endlessly floating in the still waters of space.

"The stars ..." Mark said.

"Yes?"

"The sun?"

"--shall shine as now."

"A bloody poet."

"A poor poet."

"And girls?"

"I dreamed of a girl named Martha once. Maybe if--"

"What do you think of girls? And stars? And Earth?" And it was bedtime,
this time forever.

Charles stood beside the body of his friend. He felt for a pulse once,
and allowed the withered hand to fall. He walked to a corner of the
shack and turned off the tired air pump.

The tape that Mark had prepared had a few cracked inches left to run. "I
hope he finds his Martha," the robot croaked, and then the tape broke.

His rusted limbs would not bend, and he stood frozen, staring back at
the naked stars. Then he bowed his head.

"The Lord is my shepherd," Charles said. "I shall not want. He maketh me
to lie down in green pastures; he leadeth me ..."




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ Oct.-Nov. 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.[Illustration: Illustrated by EMSH]


 Cost
 of
 Living

 _If easy payment plans were
     to be really efficient, patrons'
         lifetimes had to be extended!_

 By ROBERT SHECKLEY


Carrin decided that he could trace his present mood to Miller's suicide
last week. But the knowledge didn't help him get rid of the vague,
formless fear in the back of his mind. It was foolish. Miller's suicide
didn't concern him.

But why had that fat, jovial man killed himself? Miller had had
everything to live for--wife, kids, good job, and all the marvelous
luxuries of the age. Why had he done it?

"Good morning, dear," Carrin's wife said as he sat down at the breakfast
table.

"Morning, honey. Morning, Billy."

His son grunted something.

You just couldn't tell about people, Carrin decided, and dialed his
breakfast. The meal was gracefully prepared and served by the new
Avignon Electric Auto-cook.

His mood persisted, annoyingly enough since Carrin wanted to be in top
form this morning. It was his day off, and the Avignon Electric finance
man was coming. This was an important day.

He walked to the door with his son.

"Have a good day, Billy."

His son nodded, shifted his books and started to school without
answering. Carrin wondered if something was bothering him, too. He hoped
not. One worrier in the family was plenty.

"See you later, honey." He kissed his wife as she left to go shopping.

At any rate, he thought, watching her go down the walk, at least she's
happy. He wondered how much she'd spend at the A. E. store.

Checking his watch, he found that he had half an hour before the A. E.
finance man was due. The best way to get rid of a bad mood was to drown
it, he told himself, and headed for the shower.

       *       *       *       *       *

The shower room was a glittering plastic wonder, and the sheer luxury of
it eased Carrin's mind. He threw his clothes into the A. E. automatic
Kleen-presser, and adjusted the shower spray to a notch above "brisk."
The five-degrees-above-skin-temperature water beat against his thin
white body. Delightful! And then a relaxing rub-dry in the A. E.
Auto-towel.

Wonderful, he thought, as the towel stretched and kneaded his stringy
muscles. And it should be wonderful, he reminded himself. The A. E.
Auto-towel with shaving attachments had cost three hundred and thirteen
dollars, plus tax.

But worth every penny of it, he decided, as the A. E. shaver came out of
a corner and whisked off his rudimentary stubble. After all, what good
was life if you couldn't enjoy the luxuries?

His skin tingled when he switched off the Auto-towel. He should have
been feeling wonderful, but he wasn't. Miller's suicide kept nagging at
his mind, destroying the peace of his day off.

Was there anything else bothering him? Certainly there was nothing wrong
with the house. His papers were in order for the finance man.

"Have I forgotten something?" he asked out loud.

"The Avignon Electric finance man will be here in fifteen minutes," his
A. E. bathroom Wall-reminder whispered.

"I know that. Is there anything else?"

The Wall-reminder reeled off its memorized data--a vast amount of
minutiae about watering the lawn, having the Jet-lash checked, buying
lamb chops for Monday, and the like. Things he still hadn't found time
for.

"All right, that's enough." He allowed the A. E. Auto-dresser to dress
him, skillfully draping a new selection of fabrics over his bony frame.
A whiff of fashionable masculine perfume finished him and he went into
the living room, threading his way between the appliances that lined the
walls.

A quick inspection of the dials on the wall assured him that the house
was in order. The breakfast dishes had been sanitized and stacked, the
house had been cleaned, dusted, polished, his wife's garments had been
hung up, his son's model rocket ships had been put back in the closet.

Stop worrying, you hypochondriac, he told himself angrily.

The door announced, "Mr. Pathis from Avignon Finance is here."

Carrin started to tell the door to open, when he noticed the Automatic
Bartender.

Good God, why hadn't he thought of it!

The Automatic Bartender was manufactured by Castile Motors. He had
bought it in a weak moment. A. E. wouldn't think very highly of that,
since they sold their own brand.

       *       *       *       *       *

He wheeled the bartender into the kitchen, and told the door to open.

"A very good day to you, sir," Mr. Pathis said.

Pathis was a tall, imposing man, dressed in a conservative tweed drape.
His eyes had the crinkled corners of a man who laughs frequently. He
beamed broadly and shook Carrin's hand, looking around the crowded
living room.

"A beautiful place you have here, sir. Beautiful! As a matter of fact, I
don't think I'll be overstepping the company's code to inform you that
yours is the nicest interior in this section."

Carrin felt a sudden glow of pride at that, thinking of the rows of
identical houses, on this block and the next, and the one after that.

"Now, then, is everything functioning properly?" Mr. Pathis asked,
setting his briefcase on a chair. "Everything in order?"

"Oh, yes," Carrin said enthusiastically. "Avignon Electric never goes
out of whack."

"The phone all right? Changes records for the full seventeen hours?"

"It certainly does," Carrin said. He hadn't had a chance to try out the
phone, but it was a beautiful piece of furniture.

"The Solido-projector all right? Enjoying the programs?"

"Absolutely perfect reception." He had watched a program just last
month, and it had been startlingly lifelike.

"How about the kitchen? Auto-cook in order? Recipe-master still knocking
'em out?"

"Marvelous stuff. Simply marvelous."

Mr. Pathis went on to inquire about his refrigerator, his vacuum
cleaner, his car, his helicopter, his subterranean swimming pool, and
the hundreds of other items Carrin had bought from Avignon Electric.

"Everything is swell," Carrin said, a trifle untruthfully since he
hadn't unpacked every item yet. "Just wonderful."

"I'm so glad," Mr. Pathis said, leaning back with a sigh of relief. "You
have no idea how hard we try to satisfy our customers. If a product
isn't right, back it comes, no questions asked. We believe in pleasing
our customers."

"I certainly appreciate it, Mr. Pathis."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carrin hoped the A. E. man wouldn't ask to see the kitchen. He
visualized the Castile Motors Bartender in there, like a porcupine in a
dog show.

"I'm proud to say that most of the people in this neighborhood buy from
us," Mr. Pathis was saying. "We're a solid firm."

"Was Mr. Miller a customer of yours?" Carrin asked.

"That fellow who killed himself?" Pathis frowned briefly. "He was, as a
matter of fact. That amazed me, sir, absolutely amazed me. Why, just
last month the fellow bought a brand-new Jet-lash from me, capable of
doing three hundred and fifty miles an hour on a straightaway. He was as
happy as a kid over it, and then to go and do a thing like that! Of
course, the Jet-lash brought up his debt a little."

"Of course."

"But what did that matter? He had every luxury in the world. And then he
went and hung himself."

"Hung himself?"

"Yes," Pathis said, the frown coming back. "Every modern convenience in
his house, and he hung himself with a piece of rope. Probably unbalanced
for a long time."

The frown slid off his face, and the customary smile replaced it. "But
enough of that! Let's talk about you."

The smile widened as Pathis opened his briefcase. "Now, then, your
account. You owe us two hundred and three thousand dollars and
twenty-nine cents, Mr. Carrin, as of your last purchase. Right?"

"Right," Carrin said, remembering the amount from his own papers.
"Here's my installment."

He handed Pathis an envelope, which the man checked and put in his
pocket.

"Fine. Now you know, Mr. Carrin, that you won't live long enough to pay
us the full two hundred thousand, don't you?"

"No, I don't suppose I will," Carrin said soberly.

He was only thirty-nine, with a full hundred years of life before him,
thanks to the marvels of medical science. But at a salary of three
thousand a year, he still couldn't pay it all off and have enough to
support a family on at the same time.

"Of course, we would not want to deprive you of necessities, which in
any case is fully protected by the laws we helped formulate and pass. To
say nothing of the terrific items that are coming out next year. Things
you wouldn't want to miss, sir!"

Mr. Carrin nodded. Certainly he wanted new items.

"Well, suppose we make the customary arrangement. If you will just sign
over your son's earnings for the first thirty years of his adult life,
we can easily arrange credit for you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Pathis whipped the papers out of his briefcase and spread them in
front of Carrin.

"If you'll just sign here, sir."

"Well," Carrin said, "I'm not sure. I'd like to give the boy a start in
life, not saddle him with--"

"But my dear sir," Pathis interposed, "this is for your son as well. He
lives here, doesn't he? He has a right to enjoy the luxuries, the
marvels of science."

"Sure," Carrin said. "Only--"

"Why, sir, today the average man is living like a king. A hundred years
ago the richest man in the world couldn't buy what any ordinary citizen
possesses at present. You mustn't look upon it as a debt. It's an
investment."

"That's true," Carrin said dubiously.

He thought about his son and his rocket ship models, his star charts,
his maps. Would it be right? he asked himself.

"What's wrong?" Pathis asked cheerfully.

"Well, I was just wondering," Carrin said. "Signing over my son's
earnings--you don't think I'm getting in a little too deep, do you?"

"Too deep? My dear sir!" Pathis exploded into laughter. "Do you know
Mellon down the block? Well, don't say I said it, but he's already
mortgaged his grandchildren's salary for their full life-expectancy!
And he doesn't have half the goods he's made up his mind to own! We'll
work out something for him. Service to the customer is our job and we
know it well."

Carrin wavered visibly.

"And after you're gone, sir, they'll all belong to your son."

That was true, Carrin thought. His son would have all the marvelous
things that filled the house. And after all, it was only thirty years
out of a life expectancy of a hundred and fifty.

He signed with a flourish.

"Excellent!" Pathis said. "And by the way, has your home got an A. E.
Master-operator?"

It hadn't. Pathis explained that a Master-operator was new this year, a
stupendous advance in scientific engineering. It was designed to take
over all the functions of housecleaning and cooking, without its owner
having to lift a finger.

"Instead of running around all day, pushing half a dozen different
buttons, with the Master-operator all you have to do is push _one_! A
remarkable achievement!"

Since it was only five hundred and thirty-five dollars, Carrin signed
for one, having it added to his son's debt.

Right's right, he thought, walking Pathis to the door. This house will
be Billy's some day. His and his wife's. They certainly will want
everything up-to-date.

Just one button, he thought. That _would_ be a time-saver!

       *       *       *       *       *

After Pathis left, Carrin sat back in an adjustable chair and turned on
the solido. After twisting the Ezi-dial, he discovered that there was
nothing he wanted to see. He tilted back the chair and took a nap.

The something on his mind was still bothering him.

"Hello, darling!" He awoke to find his wife was home. She kissed him on
the ear. "Look."

She had bought an A. E. Sexitizer-negligee. He was pleasantly surprised
that that was all she had bought. Usually, Leela returned from shopping
laden down.

"It's lovely," he said.

She bent over for a kiss, then giggled--a habit he knew she had picked
up from the latest popular solido star. He wished she hadn't.

"Going to dial supper," she said, and went to the kitchen. Carrin
smiled, thinking that soon she would be able to dial the meals without
moving out of the living room. He settled back in his chair, and his son
walked in.

"How's it going, Son?" he asked heartily.

"All right," Billy answered listlessly.

"What'sa matter, Son?" The boy stared at his feet, not answering. "Come
on, tell Dad what's the trouble."

Billy sat down on a packing case and put his chin in his hands. He
looked thoughtfully at his father.

"Dad, could I be a Master Repairman if I wanted to be?"

Mr. Carrin smiled at the question. Billy alternated between wanting to
be a Master Repairman and a rocket pilot. The repairmen were the elite.
It was their job to fix the automatic repair machines. The repair
machines could fix just about anything, but you couldn't have a machine
fix the machine that fixed the machine. That was where the Master
Repairmen came in.

But it was a highly competitive field and only a very few of the best
brains were able to get their degrees. And, although the boy was bright,
he didn't seem to have an engineering bent.

"It's possible, Son. Anything is possible."

"But is it possible for me?"

"I don't know," Carrin answered, as honestly as he could.

"Well, I don't want to be a Master Repairman anyway," the boy said,
seeing that the answer was no. "I want to be a space pilot."

"A space pilot, Billy?" Leela asked, coming in to the room. "But there
aren't any."

"Yes, there are," Billy argued. "We were told in school that the
government is going to send some men to Mars."

"They've been saying that for a hundred years," Carrin said, "and they
still haven't gotten around to doing it."

"They will this time."

"Why would you want to go to Mars?" Leela asked, winking at Carrin.
"There are no pretty girls on Mars."

"I'm not interested in girls. I just want to go to Mars."

"You wouldn't like it, honey," Leela said. "It's a nasty old place with
no air."

"It's got some air. I'd like to go there," the boy insisted sullenly. "I
don't like it here."

"What's that?" Carrin asked, sitting up straight. "Is there anything you
haven't got? Anything you want?"

"No, sir. I've got everything I want." Whenever his son called him
'sir,' Carrin knew that something was wrong.

"Look, Son, when I was your age I wanted to go to Mars, too. I wanted to
do romantic things. I even wanted to be a Master Repairman."

"Then why didn't you?"

"Well, I grew up. I realized that there were more important things.
First I had to pay off the debt my father had left me, and then I met
your mother--"

Leela giggled.

"--and I wanted a home of my own. It'll be the same with you. You'll pay
off your debt and get married, the same as the rest of us."

       *       *       *       *       *

Billy was silent for a while, then he brushed his dark hair--straight,
like his father's--back from his forehead and wet his lips.

"How come I have debts, sir?"

Carrin explained carefully. About the things a family needed for
civilized living, and the cost of those items. How they had to be paid.
How it was customary for a son to take on a part of his parent's debt,
when he came of age.

Billy's silence annoyed him. It was almost as if the boy were
reproaching him. After he had slaved for years to give the ungrateful
whelp every luxury!

"Son," he said harshly, "have you studied history in school? Good. Then
you know how it was in the past. Wars. How would you like to get blown
up in a war?"

The boy didn't answer.

"Or how would you like to break your back for eight hours a day, doing
work a machine should handle? Or be hungry all the time? Or cold, with
the rain beating down on you, and no place to sleep?"

He paused for a response, got none and went on. "You live in the most
fortunate age mankind has ever known. You are surrounded by every wonder
of art and science. The finest music, the greatest books and art, all at
your fingertips. All you have to do is push a button." He shifted to a
kindlier tone. "Well, what are you thinking?"

"I was just wondering how I could go to Mars," the boy said. "With the
debt, I mean. I don't suppose I could get away from that."

"Of course not."

"Unless I stowed away on a rocket."

"But you wouldn't do that."

"No, of course not," the boy said, but his tone lacked conviction.

"You'll stay here and marry a very nice girl," Leela told him.

"Sure I will," Billy said. "Sure." He grinned suddenly. "I didn't mean
any of that stuff about going to Mars. I really didn't."

"I'm glad of that," Leela answered.

"Just forget I mentioned it," Billy said, smiling stiffly. He stood up
and raced upstairs.

"Probably gone to play with his rockets," Leela said. "He's such a
little devil."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Carrins ate a quiet supper, and then it was time for Mr. Carrin to
go to work. He was on night shift this month. He kissed his wife
good-by, climbed into his Jet-lash and roared to the factory. The
automatic gates recognized him and opened. He parked and walked in.

Automatic lathes, automatic presses--everything was automatic. The
factory was huge and bright, and the machines hummed softly to
themselves, doing their job and doing it well.

Carrin walked to the end of the automatic washing machine assembly line,
to relieve the man there.

"Everything all right?" he asked.

"Sure," the man said. "Haven't had a bad one all year. These new models
here have built-in voices. They don't light up like the old ones."

Carrin sat down where the man had sat and waited for the first washing
machine to come through. His job was the soul of simplicity. He just sat
there and the machines went by him. He pressed a button on them and
found out if they were all right. They always were. After passing him,
the washing machines went to the packaging section.

The first one slid by on the long slide of rollers. He pressed the
starting button on the side.

"Ready for the wash," the washing machine said.

Carrin pressed the release and let it go by.

That boy of his, Carrin thought. Would he grow up and face his
responsibilities? Would he mature and take his place in society? Carrin
doubted it. The boy was a born rebel. If anyone got to Mars, it would be
his kid.

But the thought didn't especially disturb him.

"Ready for the wash." Another machine went by.

Carrin remembered something about Miller. The jovial man had always been
talking about the planets, always kidding about going off somewhere and
roughing it. He hadn't, though. He'd committed suicide.

"Ready for the wash."

Carrin had eight hours in front of him, and he loosened his belt to
prepare for it. Eight hours of pushing buttons and listening to a
machine announce its readiness.

"Ready for the wash."

He pressed the release.

"Ready for the wash."

Carrin's mind strayed from the job, which didn't need much attention in
any case. He wished he had done what he had longed to do as a youngster.

It would have been great to be a rocket pilot, to push a button and go
to Mars.

                                                     --ROBERT SHECKLEY




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ December 1952.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.Death Wish

By NED LANG

Illustrated by WEISS


 Compared with a spaceship in distress, going
 to hell in a handbasket is roomy and slow!


The space freighter _Queen Dierdre_ was a great, squat, pockmarked
vessel of the Earth-Mars run and she never gave anyone a bit of trouble.
That should have been sufficient warning to Mr. Watkins, her engineer.
Watkins was fond of saying that there are two kinds of equipment--the
kind that fails bit by bit, and the kind that fails all at once.

Watkins was short and red-faced, magnificently mustached, and always a
little out of breath. With a cigar in his hand, over a glass of beer, he
talked most cynically about his ship, in the immemorial fashion of
engineers. But in reality, Watkins was foolishly infatuated with
_Dierdre_, idealized her, humanized her, and couldn't conceive of
anything serious ever happening.

On this particular run, _Dierdre_ soared away from Terra at the proper
speed; Mr. Watkins signaled that fuel was being consumed at the proper
rate; and Captain Somers cut the engines at the proper moment indicated
by Mr. Rajcik, the navigator.

As soon as Point Able had been reached and the engines stopped, Somers
frowned and studied his complex control board. He was a thin and
meticulous man, and he operated his ship with mechanical perfection. He
was well liked in the front offices of Mikkelsen Space Lines, where Old
Man Mikkelsen pointed to Captain Somers' reports as models of neatness
and efficiency. On Mars, he stayed at the Officers' Club, eschewing the
stews and dives of Marsport. On Earth, he lived in a little Vermont
cottage and enjoyed the quiet companionship of two cats, a Japanese
houseboy, and a wife.

       *       *       *       *       *

His instructions read true. And yet he sensed something wrong. Somers
knew every creak, rattle and groan that _Dierdre_ was capable of making.
During blastoff, he had heard something _different_. In space, something
different had to be wrong.

"Mr. Rajcik," he said, turning to his navigator, "would you check the
cargo? I believe something may have shifted."

"You bet," Rajcik said cheerfully. He was an almost offensively handsome
young man with black wavy hair, blase blue eyes and a cleft chin.
Despite his appearance, Rajcik was thoroughly qualified for his
position. But he was only one of fifty thousand thoroughly qualified men
who lusted for a berth on one of the fourteen spaceships in existence.
Only Stephen Rajcik had had the foresight, appearance and fortitude to
court and wed Helga, Old Man Mikkelsen's eldest daughter.

Rajcik went aft to the cargo hold. _Dierdre_ was carrying transistors
this time, and microfilm books, platinum filaments, salamis, and other
items that could not as yet be produced on Mars. But the bulk of her
space was taken by the immense Fahrensen Computer.

Rajcik checked the positioning lines on the monster, examined the stays
and turnbuckles that held it in place, and returned to the cabin.

"All in order, Boss," he reported to Captain Somers, with the smile that
only an employer's son-in-law can both manage and afford.

"Mr. Watkins, do you read anything?"

Watkins was at his own instrument panel. "Not a thing, sir. I'll vouch
for every bit of equipment in _Dierdre_."

"Very well. How long before we reach Point Baker?"

"Three minutes, Chief," Rajcik said.

"Good."

The spaceship hung in the void, all sensation of speed lost for lack of
a reference point. Beyond the portholes was darkness, the true color of
the Universe, perforated by the brilliant lost points of the stars.

Captain Somers turned away from the disturbing reminder of his extreme
finitude and wondered if he could land _Dierdre_ without shifting the
computer. It was by far the largest, heaviest and most delicate piece of
equipment ever transported in space.

He worried about that machine. Its value ran into the billions of
dollars, for Mars Colony had ordered the best possible, a machine whose
utility would offset the immense transportation charge across space. As
a result, the Fahrensen Computer was perhaps the most complex and
advanced machine ever built by Man.

"Ten seconds to Point Baker," Rajcik announced.

"Very well." Somers readied himself at the control board.

"Four--three--two--one--fire!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Somers activated the engines. Acceleration pressed the three men back
into their couches, and more acceleration, and--shockingly--still more
acceleration.

"The fuel!" Watkins yelped, watching his indicators spinning.

"The course!" Rajcik gasped, fighting for breath.

Captain Somers cut the engine switch. The engines continued firing,
pressing the men deeper into their couches. The cabin lights flickered,
went out, came on again.

And still the acceleration mounted and _Dierdre's_ engines howled in
agony, thrusting the ship forward. Somers raised one leaden hand and
inched it toward the emergency cut-off switch. With a fantastic
expenditure of energy, he reached the switch, depressed it.

The engines stopped with dramatic suddenness, while tortured metal
creaked and groaned. The lights flickered rapidly, as though _Dierdre_
were blinking in pain. They steadied and then there was silence.

Watkins hurried to the engine room. He returned morosely.

"Of all the damn things," he muttered.

"What was it?" Captain Somers asked.

"Main firing circuit. It fused on us." He shook his head. "Metal
fatigue, I'd say. It must have been flawed for years."

"When was it last checked out?"

"Well, it's a sealed unit. Supposed to outlast the ship. Absolutely
foolproof, unless--"

"Unless it's flawed."

"Don't blame it on me! Those circuits are supposed to be X-rayed,
heat-treated, fluoroscoped--you just can't trust machinery!"

At last Watkins believed that engineering axiom.

"How are we on fuel?" Captain Somers asked.

"Not enough left to push a kiddy car down Main Street," Watkins said
gloomily. "If I could get my hands on that factory inspector ..."

Captain Somers turned to Rajcik, who was seated at the navigator's desk,
hunched over his charts. "How does this affect our course?"

Rajcik finished the computation he was working on and gnawed
thoughtfully at his pencil.

"It kills us. We're going to cross the orbit of Mars before Mars gets
there."

"How long before?"

"Too long. Captain, we're flying out of the Solar System like the
proverbial bat out of hell."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rajcik smiled, a courageous, devil-may-care smile which Watkins found
singularly inappropriate.

"Damn it, man," he roared, "don't just leave it there. We've got a
little fuel left. We can turn her, can't we? You _are_ a navigator,
aren't you?"

"I am," Rajcik said icily. "And if I computed my courses the way you
maintain your engines, we'd be plowing through Australia now."

"Why, you little company toady! At least I got my job legitimately, not
by marrying--"

"That's enough!" Captain Somers cut in.

Watkins, his face a mottled red, his mustache bristling, looked like a
walrus about to charge. And Rajcik, eyes glittering, was waiting
hopefully.

"No more of this," Somers said. "I give the orders here."

"Then give some!" Watkins snapped. "Tell him to plot a return curve.
This is life or death!"

"All the more reason for remaining cool. Mr. Rajcik, can you plot such a
course?"

"First thing I tried," Rajcik said. "Not a chance, on the fuel we have
left. We can turn a degree or two, but it won't help."

Watkins said, "Of course it will! We'll curve back into the Solar
System!"

"Sure, but the best curve we can make will take a few thousand years for
us to complete."

"Perhaps a landfall on some other planet--Neptune, Uranus--"

Rajcik shook his head. "Even if an outer planet were in the right place
at the right time, we'd need fuel--a lot of fuel--to get into a braking
orbit. And if we could, who'd come get us? No ship has gone past Mars
yet."

"At least we'd have a chance," Watkins said.

"Maybe," Rajcik agreed indifferently. "But we can't swing it. I'm afraid
you'll have to kiss the Solar System good-by."

Captain Somers wiped his forehead and tried to think of a plan. He
found it difficult to concentrate. There was too great a discrepancy
between his knowledge of the situation and its appearance. He
knew--intellectually--that his ship was traveling out of the Solar
System at a tremendous rate of speed. But in appearance they were
stationary, hung in the abyss, three men trapped in a small, hot room,
breathing the smell of hot metal and perspiration.

"What shall we do, Captain?" Watkins asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Somers frowned at the engineer. Did the man expect him to pull a
solution out of the air? How was he even supposed to concentrate on the
problem? He had to slow the ship, turn it. But his senses told him that
the ship was not moving. How, then, could speed constitute a problem?

He couldn't help but feel that the real problem was to get away from
these high-strung, squabbling men, to escape from this hot, smelly
little room.

"Captain! You must have some idea!"

Somers tried to shake his feeling of unreality. The problem, the real
problem, he told himself, was how to stop the ship.

He looked around the fixed cabin and out the porthole at the unmoving
stars. _We are moving very rapidly_, he thought, unconvinced.

Rajcik said disgustedly, "Our noble captain can't face the situation."

"Of course I can," Somers objected, feeling very light-headed and
unreal. "I can pilot any course you lay down. That's my only real
responsibility. Plot us a course to Mars!"

"Sure!" Rajcik said, laughing. "I can! I will! Engineer, I'm going to
need plenty of fuel for this course--about ten tons! See that I get it!"

"Right you are," said Watkins. "Captain, I'd like to put in a
requisition for ten tons of fuel."

"Requisition granted," Somers said. "All right, gentlemen,
responsibility is inevitably circular. Let's get a grip on ourselves.
Mr. Rajcik, suppose you radio Mars."

When contact had been established, Somers took the microphone and stated
their situation. The company official at the other end seemed to have
trouble grasping it.

"But can't you turn the ship?" he asked bewilderedly. "Any kind of an
orbit--"

"No. I've just explained that."

"Then what do you propose to do, Captain?"

"That's exactly what I'm asking you."

There was a babble of voices from the loudspeaker, punctuated by bursts
of static. The lights flickered and reception began to fade. Rajcik,
working frantically, managed to re-establish the contact.

"Captain," the official on Mars said, "we can't think of a thing. If you
could swing into any sort of an orbit--"

"I can't!"

"Under the circumstances, you have the right to try anything at all.
Anything, Captain!"

Somers groaned. "Listen, I can think of just one thing. We could bail
out in spacesuits as near Mars as possible. Link ourselves together,
take the portable transmitter. It wouldn't give much of a signal, but
you'd know our approximate position. Everything would have to be figured
pretty closely--those suits just carry twelve hours' air--but it's a
chance."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a confusion of voices from the other end. Then the official
said, "I'm sorry, Captain."

"What? I'm telling you it's our one chance!"

"Captain, the only ship on Mars now is the _Diana_. Her engines are
being overhauled."

"How long before she can be spaceborne?"

"Three weeks, at least. And a ship from Earth would take too long.
Captain, I wish we could think of something. About the only thing we can
suggest--"

The reception suddenly failed again.

Rajcik cursed frustratedly as he worked over the radio. Watkins gnawed
at his mustache. Somers glanced out a porthole and looked hurriedly
away, for the stars, their destination, were impossibly distant.

They heard static again, faintly now.

"I can't get much more," Rajcik said. "This damned reception.... What
could they have been suggesting?"

"Whatever it was," said Watkins, "they didn't think it would work."

"What the hell does that matter?" Rajcik asked, annoyed. "It'd give us
something to do."

They heard the official's voice, a whisper across space.

"Can you hear ... Suggest ..."

At full amplification, the voice faded, then returned. "Can only suggest
... most unlikely ... but try ... calculator ... try ..."

[Illustration]

The voice was gone. And then even the static was gone.

"That does it," Rajcik said. "The calculator? Did he mean the Fahrensen
Computer in our hold?"

"I see what he meant," said Captain Somers. "The Fahrensen is a very
advanced job. No one knows the limits of its potential. He suggests we
present our problem to it."

"That's ridiculous," Watkins snorted. "This problem has no solution."

"It doesn't seem to," Somers agreed. "But the big computers have solved
other apparently impossible problems. We can't lose anything by trying."

"No," said Rajcik, "as long as we don't pin any hopes on it."

"That's right. We don't dare hope. Mr. Watkins, I believe this is your
department."

"Oh, what's the use?" Watkins asked. "You say don't hope--but both of
you are hoping anyhow! You think the big electronic god is going to save
your lives. Well, it's not!"

"We have to try," Somers told him.

"We don't! I wouldn't give it the satisfaction of turning us down!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They stared at him in vacant astonishment.

"Now you're implying that machines think," said Rajcik.

"Of course I am," Watkins said. "Because they do! No, I'm not out of my
head. Any engineer will tell you that a complex machine has a
personality all its own. Do you know what that personality is like?
Cold, withdrawn, uncaring, unfeeling. A machine's only purpose is to
frustrate desire and produce two problems for every one it solves. And
do you know why a machine feels this way?"

"You're hysterical," Somers told him.

"I am not. A machine feels this way because it _knows_ it is an
unnatural creation in nature's domain. Therefore it wishes to reach
entropy and cease--a mechanical death wish."

"I've never heard such gibberish in my life," Somers said. "Are you
going to hook up that computer?"

"Of course. I'm a human. I keep trying. I just wanted you to understand
_fully_ that there is no hope." He went to the cargo hold.

After he had gone, Rajcik grinned and shook his head. "We'd better watch
him."

"He'll be all right," Somers said.

"Maybe, maybe not." Rajcik pursed his lips thoughtfully. "He's blaming
the situation on a machine personality now, trying to absolve himself of
guilt. And it _is_ his fault that we're in this spot. An engineer is
responsible for all equipment."

"I don't believe you can put the blame on him so dogmatically," Somers
replied.

"Sure I can," Rajcik said. "I personally don't care, though. This is as
good a way to die as any other and better than most."

Captain Somers wiped perspiration from his face. Again the notion came
to him that the problem--the _real_ problem--was to find a way out of
this hot, smelly, motionless little box.

Rajcik said, "Death in space is an appealing idea, in certain ways.
Imagine an entire spaceship for your tomb! And you have a variety of
ways of actually dying. Thirst and starvation I rule out as
unimaginative. But there are possibilities in heat, cold, implosion,
explosion--"

"This is pretty morbid," Somers said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm a pretty morbid fellow," Rajcik said carelessly. "But at least I'm
not blaming inanimate objects, the way Watkins is. Or permitting myself
the luxury of shock, like you." He studied Somers' face. "This is your
first real emergency, isn't it, Captain?"

"I suppose so," Somers answered vaguely.

"And you're responding to it like a stunned ox," Rajcik said. "Wake up,
Captain! If you can't live with joy, at least try to extract some
pleasure from your dying."

"Shut up," Somers said, with no heat. "Why don't you read a book or
something?"

"I've read all the books on board. I have nothing to distract me except
an analysis of your character."

Watkins returned to the cabin. "Well, I've activated your big electronic
god. Would anyone care to make a burned offering in front of it?"

"Have you given it the problem?"

"Not yet. I decided to confer with the high priest. What shall I request
of the demon, sir?"

"Give it all the data you can," Somers said. "Fuel, oxygen, water,
food--that sort of thing. Then tell it we want to return to Earth.
Alive," he added.

"It'll love that," Watkins said. "It'll get such pleasure out of
rejecting our problem as unsolvable. Or better yet--insufficient data.
In that way, it can hint that a solution is possible, but just outside
our reach. It can keep us hoping."

Somers and Rajcik followed him to the cargo hold. The computer,
activated now, hummed softly. Lights flashed swiftly over its panels,
blue and white and red.

Watkins punched buttons and turned dials for fifteen minutes, then moved
back.

"Watch for the red light on top," he said. "That means the problem is
rejected."

"Don't say it," Rajcik warned quickly.

Watkins laughed. "Superstitious little fellow, aren't you?"

"But not incompetent," Rajcik said, smiling.

"Can't you two quit it?" Somers demanded, and both men turned startedly
to face him.

"Behold!" Rajcik said. "The sleeper has awakened."

"After a fashion," said Watkins, snickering.

Somers suddenly felt that if death or rescue did not come quickly, they
would kill each other, or drive each other crazy.

"Look!" Rajcik said.

       *       *       *       *       *

A light on the computer's panel was flashing green.

"Must be a mistake," said Watkins. "Green means the problem is solvable
within the conditions set down."

"Solvable!" Rajcik said.

"But it's impossible," Watkins argued. "It's fooling us, leading us
on--"

"Don't be superstitious," Rajcik mocked. "How soon do we get the
solution?"

"It's coming now." Watkins pointed to a paper tape inching out of a slot
in the machine's face. "But there must be something wrong!"

They watched as, millimeter by millimeter, the tape crept out. The
computer hummed, its lights flashing green. Then the hum stopped. The
green lights blazed once more and faded.

"What happened?" Rajcik wanted to know.

"It's finished," Watkins said.

"Pick it up! Read it!"

"You read it. You won't get _me_ to play its game."

Rajcik laughed nervously and rubbed his hands together, but didn't move.
Both men turned to Somers.

"Captain, it's your responsibility."

"Go ahead, Captain!"

Somers looked with loathing at his engineer and navigator. _His_
responsibility, everything was _his_ responsibility. Would they never
leave him alone?

He went up to the machine, pulled the tape free, read it with slow
deliberation.

"What does it say, sir?" Rajcik asked.

"Is it--possible?" Watkins urged.

"Oh, yes," Somers said. "It's possible." He laughed and looked around at
the hot, smelly, low-ceilinged little room with its locked doors and
windows.

"What is it?" Rajcik shouted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Somers said, "You figured a few thousand years to return to the Solar
System, Rajcik? Well, the computer agrees with you. Twenty-three hundred
years, to be precise. Therefore, it has given us a suitable longevity
serum."

"Twenty-three hundred years," Rajcik mumbled. "I suppose we hibernate or
something of the sort."

"Not at all," Somers said calmly. "As a matter of fact, this serum does
away quite nicely with the need for sleep. We stay awake and watch each
other."

The three men looked at one another and at the sickeningly familiar room
smelling of metal and perspiration, its sealed doors and windows that
stared at an unchanging spectacle of stars.

Watkins said, "Yes, that's the sort of thing it would do."

                                                            --NED LANG




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ June 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction August 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                         diplomatic immunity


                          By ROBERT SHECKLEY


                        Illustrated by ASHMAN


     _He said he wasn't immortal--but nothing could kill him.
      Still, if the Earth was to live as a free world, he had to
      die._

       *       *       *       *       *




"Come right in, gentlemen," the Ambassador waved them into the very
special suite the State Department had given him. "Please be seated."

Colonel Cercy accepted a chair, trying to size up the individual who
had all Washington chewing its fingernails. The Ambassador hardly
looked like a menace. He was of medium height and slight build,
dressed in a conservative brown tweed suit that the State Department
had given him. His face was intelligent, finely molded and aloof.

_As human as a human_, Cercy thought, studying the alien with bleak,
impersonal eyes.

"How may I serve you?" the Ambassador asked, smiling.

"The President has put me in charge of your case," Cercy said. "I've
studied Professor Darrig's reports--" he nodded at the scientist
beside him--"but I'd like to hear the whole thing for myself."

"Of course," the alien said, lighting a cigarette. He seemed genuinely
pleased to be asked; which was interesting, Cercy thought. In the week
since he had landed, every important scientist in the country had been
at him.

_But in a pinch they call the Army_, Cercy reminded himself. He
settled back in his chair, both hands jammed carelessly in his
pockets. His right hand was resting on the butt of a .45, the safety
off.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have come," the alien said, "as an ambassador-at-large,
representing an empire that stretches half-way across the Galaxy. I
wish to extend the welcome of my people and to invite you to join our
organization."

"I see," Cercy replied. "Some of the scientists got the impression
that participation was compulsory."

"You will join," the Ambassador said, blowing smoke through his
nostrils.

Cercy could see Darrig stiffen in his chair and bite his lip. Cercy
moved the automatic to a position where he could draw it easily. "How
did you find us?" he asked.

"We ambassadors-at-large are each assigned an unexplored section of
space," the alien said. "We examine each star-system in that region
for planets, and each planet for intelligent life. Intelligent life is
rare in the Galaxy, you know."

Cercy nodded, although he hadn't been aware of the fact.

"When we find such a planet, we land, as I did, and prepare the
inhabitants for their part in our organization."

"How will your people know that you have found intelligent life?"
Cercy asked.

"There is a sending mechanism that is part of our structure," the
Ambassador answered. "It is triggered when we reach an inhabited
planet. This signal is beamed continually into space, to an effective
range of several thousand light-years. Follow-up crews are continually
sweeping through the limits of the reception area of each Ambassador,
listening for such messages. Detecting one, a colonizing team follows
it to the planet."

He tapped his cigarette delicately on the edge of an ash tray. "This
method has definite advantages over sending combined colonization and
exploration teams obviously. It avoids the necessity of equipping
large forces for what may be decades of searching."

"Sure." Cercy's face was expressionless. "Would you tell me more about
this message?"

"There isn't much more you need know. The beam is not detectable by
your methods and, therefore, cannot be jammed. The message continues
as long as I am alive."

       *       *       *       *       *

Darrig drew in his breath sharply, glancing at Cercy.

"If you stopped broadcasting," Cercy said casually, "our planet would
never be found."

"Not until this section of space was resurveyed," the diplomat agreed.

"Very well. As a duly appointed representative of the President of the
United States, I ask you to stop transmitting. We don't choose to
become part of your empire."

"I'm sorry," the Ambassador said. He shrugged his shoulders easily.
Cercy wondered how many times he had played this scene on how many
other planets.

"There's really nothing I can do." He stood up.

"Then you won't stop?"

"I can't. I have no control over the sending, once it's activated."
The diplomat turned and walked to the window. "However, I have
prepared a philosophy for you. It is my duty, as your Ambassador, to
ease the shock of transition as much as possible. This philosophy will
make it instantly apparent that--"

As the Ambassador reached the window, Cercy's gun was out of his
pocket and roaring. He squeezed six rounds in almost a single
explosion, aiming at the Ambassador's head and back. Then an
uncontrollable shudder ran through him.

The Ambassador was no longer there!

       *       *       *       *       *

Cercy and Darrig stared at each other. Darrig muttered something about
ghosts. Then, just as suddenly, the Ambassador was back.

"You didn't think," he said, "that it would be as easy as all that,
did you? We Ambassadors have, necessarily, a certain diplomatic
immunity." He fingered one of the bullet holes in the wall. "In case
you don't understand, let me put it this way. It is not in your power
to kill me. You couldn't even understand the nature of my defense."

He looked at them, and in that moment Cercy felt the Ambassador's
complete alienness.

"Good day, gentlemen," he said.

Darrig and Cercy walked silently back to the control room. Neither had
really expected that the Ambassador would be killed so easily, but it
had still been a shock when the slugs had failed.

"I suppose you saw it all, Malley?" Cercy asked, when he reached the
control room.

The thin, balding psychiatrist nodded sadly. "Got it on film, too."

"I wonder what his philosophy is," Darrig mused, half to himself.

"It was illogical to expect it would work. No race would send an
ambassador with a message like that and expect him to live through it.
Unless--"

"Unless what?"

"Unless he had a pretty effective defense," the psychiatrist finished
unhappily.

Cercy walked across the room and looked at the video panel. The
Ambassador's suite was very special. It had been hurriedly constructed
two days after he had landed and delivered his message. The suite was
steel and lead lined, filled with video and movie cameras, recorders,
and a variety of other things.

It was the last word in elaborate death cells.

In the screen, Cercy could see the Ambassador sitting at a table. He
was typing on a little portable the Government had given him.

"Hey, Harrison!" Cercy called. "Might as well go ahead with Plan Two."

Harrison came out of a side room where he had been examining the
circuits leading to the Ambassador's suite. Methodically he checked
his pressure gauges, set the controls and looked at Cercy. "Now?" he
asked.

"Now." Cercy watched the screen. The Ambassador was still typing.

Suddenly, as Harrison sent home the switch, the room was engulfed in
flames. Fire blasted out of concealed holes in the walls, poured from
the ceiling and floor.

In a moment, the room was like the inside of a blast furnace.

Cercy let it burn for two minutes, then motioned Harrison to cut the
switch. They stared at the roasted room.

They were looking, hopefully, for a charred corpse.

But the Ambassador reappeared beside his desk, looking ruefully at the
charred typewriter. He was completely unsinged.

"Could you get me another typewriter?" he asked, looking directly at
one of the hidden projectors. "I'm setting down a philosophy for you
ungrateful wretches."

He seated himself in the wreckage of an armchair. In a moment, he was
apparently asleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

"All right, everyone grab a seat," Cercy said. "Time for a council of
war."

Malley straddled a chair backward. Harrison lighted a pipe as he sat
down, slowly puffing it into life.

"Now, then," Cercy said. "The Government has dropped this squarely in
our laps. We have to kill the Ambassador--obviously. I've been put in
charge." Cercy grinned with regret. "Probably because no one higher up
wants the responsibility of failure. And I've selected you three as my
staff. We can have anything we want, any assistance or advice we need.
All right. Any ideas?"

"How about Plan Three?" Harrison asked.

"We'll get to that," Cercy said. "But I don't believe it's going to
work."

"I don't either," Darrig agreed. "We don't even know the nature of his
defense."

"That's the first order of business. Malley, take all our data so far,
and get someone to feed it into the Derichman Analyzer. You know the
stuff we want. What properties has X, if X can do thus and thus?"

"Right," Malley said. He left, muttering something about the
ascendancy of the physical sciences.

"Harrison," Cercy asked, "is Plan Three set up?"

"Sure."

"Give it a try."

While Harrison was making his last adjustments, Cercy watched Darrig.
The plump little physicist was staring thoughtfully into space,
muttering to himself. Cercy hoped he would come up with something. He
was expecting great things of Darrig.

Knowing the impossibility of working with great numbers of people,
Cercy had picked his staff with care. Quality was what he wanted.

With that in mind, he had chosen Harrison first. The stocky,
sour-faced engineer had a reputation for being able to build anything,
given half an idea of how it worked.

Cercy had selected Malley, the psychiatrist, because he wasn't sure
that killing the Ambassador was going to be a purely physical problem.

Darrig was a mathematical physicist, but his restless, curious mind
had come up with some interesting theories in other fields. He was the
only one of the four who was really interested in the Ambassador as an
intellectual problem.

"He's like Metal Old Man," Darrig said finally.

"What's that?"

"Haven't you ever heard the story of Metal Old Man? Well, he was a
monster covered with black metal armor. He was met by Monster-Slayer,
an Apache culture hero. Monster-Slayer, after many attempts, finally
killed Metal Old Man."

"How did he do it?"

"Shot him in the armpit. He didn't have any armor there."

"Fine," Cercy grinned. "Ask our Ambassador to raise his arm."

"All set!" Harrison called.

"Fine. Go."

In the Ambassador's room, an invisible spray of gamma rays silently
began to flood the room with deadly radiation.

But there was no Ambassador to receive them.

"That's enough," Cercy said, after a while. "That would kill a herd of
elephants."

But the Ambassador stayed invisible for five hours, until some of the
radioactivity had abated. Then he appeared again.

"I'm still waiting for that typewriter," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Here's the Analyzer's report." Malley handed Cercy a sheaf of papers.
"This is the final formulation, boiled down."

Cercy read it aloud: "The simplest defense against any and all
weapons, is to _become_ each particular weapon."

"Great," Harrison said. "What does it mean?"

"It means," Darrig explained, "that when we attack the Ambassador with
fire, he turns into fire. Shoot at him, and he turns into a
bullet--until the menace is gone, and then he changes back again." He
took the papers out of Cercy's hand and riffled through them.

"Hmm. Wonder if there's any historical parallel? Don't suppose so." He
raised his head. "Although this isn't conclusive, it seems logical
enough. Any other defense would involve recognition of the weapon
first, then an appraisal, then a countermove predicated on the
potentialities of the weapon. The Ambassador's defense would be a lot
faster and safer. He wouldn't have to recognize the weapon. I suppose
his body simply _identifies_, in some way, with the menace at hand."

"Did the Analyzer say there was any way of breaking this defense?"
Cercy asked.

"The Analyzer stated definitely that there was no way, if the premise
were true," Malley answered gloomily.

"We can discard that judgment," Darrig said. "The machine is limited."

"But we still haven't got any way of stopping him," Malley pointed
out. "And he's still broadcasting that beam."

Cercy thought for a moment. "Call in every expert you can find. We're
going to throw the book at the Ambassador. I know," he said, looking
at Darrig's dubious expression, "but we have to try."

       *       *       *       *       *

During the next few days, every combination and permutation of death
was thrown at the Ambassador. He was showered with weapons, ranging
from Stone-Age axes to modern high-powered rifles, peppered with hand
grenades, drowned in acid, suffocated in poison gas.

He kept shrugging his shoulders philosophically, and continued to work
on the new typewriter they had given him.

Bacteria was piped in, first the known germ diseases, then mutated
species.

The diplomat didn't even sneeze.

He was showered with electricity, radiation, wooden weapons, iron
weapons, copper weapons, brass weapons, uranium weapons--anything and
everything, just to cover all possibilities.

He didn't suffer a scratch, but his room looked as though a bar-room
brawl had been going on in it continually for fifty years.

Malley was working on an idea of his own, as was Darrig. The physicist
interrupted himself long enough to remind Cercy of the Baldur myth.
Baldur had been showered with every kind of weapon and remained
unscathed, because everything on Earth had promised to love him.
Everything, except the mistletoe. When a little twig of it was shot at
him, he died.

Cercy turned away impatiently, but had an order of mistletoe sent up,
just in case.

It was, at least, no less effective than the explosive shells or the
bow and arrow. It did nothing except lend an oddly festive air to the
battered room.

After a week of this, they moved the unprotesting Ambassador into a
newer, bigger, stronger death cell. They were unable to venture into
his old one because of the radioactivity and micro-organisms.

The Ambassador went back to work at his typewriter. All his previous
attempts had been burned, torn or eaten away.

"Let's go talk to him," Darrig suggested, after another day had
passed. Cercy agreed. For the moment, they were out of ideas.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Come right in, gentlemen," the Ambassador said, so cheerfully that
Cercy felt sick. "I'm sorry I can't offer you anything. Through an
oversight, I haven't been given any food or water for about ten days.
Not that it matters, of course."

"Glad to hear it," Cercy said. The Ambassador hardly looked as if he
had been facing all the violence Earth had to offer. On the contrary,
Cercy and his men looked as though they had been under bombardment.

"You've got quite a defense there," Malley said conversationally.

"Glad you like it."

"Would you mind telling us how it works?" Darrig asked innocently.

"Don't you know?"

"We think so. You become what is attacking you. Is that right?"

"Certainly," the Ambassador said. "You see, I have no secrets from
you."

"Is there anything we can give you," Cercy asked, "to get you to turn
off that signal?"

"A bribe?"

"Sure," Cercy said. "Anything you--?"

"Nothing," the Ambassador replied.

"Look, be reasonable," Harrison said. "You don't want to cause a war,
do you? Earth is united now. We're arming--"

"With what?"

"Atom bombs," Malley answered him. "Hydrogen bombs. We're--"

"Drop one on me," the Ambassador said. "It wouldn't kill me. What
makes you think it will have any effect on my people?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The four men were silent. Somehow, they hadn't thought of that.

"A people's ability to make war," the Ambassador stated, "is a measure
of the status of their civilization. Stage one is the use of simple
physical extensions. Stage two is control at the molecular level. You
are on the threshold of stage three, although still far from mastery
of atomic and subatomic forces." He smiled ingratiatingly. "My people
are reaching the limits of stage five."

"What would that be?" Darrig asked.

"You'll find out," the Ambassador said. "But perhaps you've wondered
if my powers are typical? I don't mind telling you that they're not.
In order for me to do my job and nothing more, I have certain built-in
restrictions, making me capable only of passive action."

"Why?" Darrig asked.

"For obvious reasons. If I were to take positive action in a moment of
anger, I might destroy your entire planet."

"Do you expect us to believe that?" Cercy asked.

"Why not? Is it so hard to understand? Can't you believe that there
are forces you know nothing about? And there is another reason for my
passiveness. Certainly by this time you've deduced it?"

"To break our spirit, I suppose," Cercy said.

"Exactly. My telling you won't make any difference, either. The
pattern is always the same. An Ambassador lands and delivers his
message to a high-spirited, wild young race like yours. There is
frenzied resistance against him, spasmodic attempts to kill him. After
all these fail, the people are usually quite crestfallen. When the
colonization team arrives, their indoctrination goes along just that
much faster." He paused, then said, "Most planets are more interested
in the philosophy I have to offer. I assure you, it will make the
transition far easier."

He held out a sheaf of typewritten pages. "Won't you at least look
through it?"

Darrig accepted the papers and put them in his pocket. "When I get
time."

"I suggest you give it a try," the Ambassador said. "You must be near
the crisis point now. Why not give it up?"

"Not yet," Cercy replied tonelessly.

"Don't forget to read the philosophy," the Ambassador urged them.

The men hurried from the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now look," Malley said, once they were back in the control room,
"there are a few things we haven't tried. How about utilizing
psychology?"

"Anything you like," Cercy agreed, "including black magic. What did
you have in mind?"

"The way I see it," Malley answered, "the Ambassador is geared to
respond, instantaneously, to any threat. He must have an
all-or-nothing defensive reflex. I suggest first that we try something
that won't trigger that reflex."

"Like what?" Cercy asked.

"Hypnotism. Perhaps we can find out something."

"Sure," Cercy said. "Try it. Try anything."

Cercy, Malley and Darrig gathered around the video screen as an
infinitesimal amount of a light hypnotic gas was admitted into the
Ambassador's room. At the same time, a bolt of electricity lashed into
the chair where the Ambassador was sitting.

"That was to distract him," Malley explained. The Ambassador vanished
before the electricity struck him, and then appeared again, curled up
in his armchair.

"That's enough," Malley whispered, and shut the valve. They watched.
After a while, the Ambassador put down his book and stared into the
distance.

"How strange," he said. "Alfern dead. Good friend ... just a freak
accident. He ran into it, out there. Didn't have a chance. But it
doesn't happen often."

"He's thinking out loud," Malley whispered, although there was no
possibility of the Ambassador's hearing them. "Vocalizing his
thoughts. His friend must have been on his mind for some time."

"Of course," the Ambassador went on, "Alfern had to die sometime. No
immortality--yet. But that way--no defense. Out there in space they
just pop up. Always there, underneath, just waiting for a chance to
boil out."

"His body isn't reacting to the hypnotic as a menace yet," Cercy
whispered.

"Well," the Ambassador told himself, "the regularizing principle has
been doing pretty well, keeping it all down, smoothing out the
inconsistencies--"

Suddenly he leaped to his feet, his face pale for a moment, as he
obviously tried to remember what he had said. Then he laughed.

"Clever. That's the first time that particular trick has been played
on me, and the last time. But, gentlemen, it didn't do you any good. I
don't know, myself, how to go about killing me." He laughed at the
blank walls.

"Besides," he continued, "the colonizing team must have the direction
now. They'll find you with or without me."

He sat down again, smiling.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That does it!" Darrig cried. "He's not invulnerable. Something killed
his friend Alfern."

"Something out in space," Cercy reminded him. "I wonder what it was."

"Let me see," Darrig reflected aloud. "The regularizing principle.
That must be a natural law we knew nothing about. And underneath--what
would be underneath?"

"He said the colonization team would find us anyhow," Malley reminded
them.

"First things first," Cercy said. "He might have been bluffing us ...
no, I don't suppose so. We still have to get the Ambassador out of the
way."

"I think I know what is underneath!" Darrig exclaimed. "This is
wonderful. A new cosmology, perhaps."

"What is it?" Cercy asked. "Anything we can use?"

"I think so. But let me work it out. I think I'll go back to my hotel.
I have some books there I want to check, and I don't want to be
disturbed for a few hours."

"All right," Cercy agreed. "But what--?"

[Illustration]

"No, no, I could be wrong," Darrig said. "Let me work it out." He
hurried from the room.

"What do you think he's driving at?" Malley asked.

"Beats me," Cercy shrugged. "Come on, let's try some more of that
psychological stuff."

First they filled the Ambassador's room with several feet of water.
Not enough to drown him, just enough to make him good and
uncomfortable.

To this, they added the lights. For eight hours, lights flashed in the
Ambassador's room. Bright lights to pry under his eyelids; dull,
clashing ones to disturb him.

Sound came next--screeches and screams and shrill, grating noises. The
sound of a man's fingernails being dragged across slate, amplified a
thousand times, and strange, sucking noises, and shouts and whispers.

Then, the smells. Then, everything else they could think of that could
drive a man insane.

The Ambassador slept peacefully through it all.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now look," Cercy said, the following day, "let's start using our
damned heads." His voice was hoarse and rough. Although the
psychological torture hadn't bothered the Ambassador, it seemed to
have backfired on Cercy and his men.

"Where in hell is Darrig?"

"Still working on that idea of his," Malley said, rubbing his stubbled
chin. "Says he's just about got it."

"We'll work on the assumption that he can't produce," Cercy said.
"Start thinking. For example, if the Ambassador can turn into
anything, what is there he can't turn into?"

"Good question," Harrison grunted.

"It's the payoff question," Cercy said. "No use throwing a spear at a
man who can turn into one."

"How about this?" Malley asked. "Taking it for granted he can turn
into anything, how about putting him in a situation where he'll be
attacked even _after_ he alters?"

"I'm listening," Cercy said.

"Say he's in danger. He turns into the thing threatening him. What if
_that thing_ were itself being threatened? And, in turn, was in the
act of threatening something else? What would he do then?"

"How are you going to put that into action?" Cercy asked.

"Like this." Malley picked up the telephone. "Hello? Give me the
Washington Zoo. This is urgent."

The Ambassador turned as the door opened. An unwilling, angry, hungry
tiger was propelled in. The door slammed shut.

The tiger looked at the Ambassador. The Ambassador looked at the
tiger.

"Most ingenious," the Ambassador said.

At the sound of his voice, the tiger came unglued. He sprang like a
steel spring uncoiling, landing on the floor where the Ambassador had
been.

The door opened again. Another tiger was pushed in. He snarled angrily
and leaped at the first. They smashed together in midair.

The Ambassador appeared a few feet off, watching. He moved back when a
lion entered the door, head up and alert. The lion sprang at him,
almost going over on his head when he struck nothing. Not finding any
human, the lion leaped on one of the tigers.

The Ambassador reappeared in his chair, where he sat smoking and
watching the beasts kill each other.

In ten minutes the room looked like an abattoir.

But by then the Ambassador had tired of the spectacle, and was
reclining on his bed, reading.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I give up," Malley said. "That was my last bright idea."

Cercy stared at the floor, not answering. Harrison was seated in the
corner, getting quietly drunk.

The telephone rang.

"Yeah?" Cercy said.

"I've got it!" Darrig's voice shouted over the line. "I really think
this is it. Look, I'm taking a cab right down. Tell Harrison to find
some helpers."

"What is it?" Cercy asked.

"The chaos underneath!" Darrig replied, and hung up.

They paced the floor, waiting for him to show up. Half an hour passed,
then an hour. Finally, three hours after he had called, Darrig
strolled in.

"Hello," he said casually.

"Hello, hell!" Cercy growled. "What kept you?"

"On the way over," Darrig said, "I read the Ambassador's philosophy.
It's quite a work."

"Is that what took you so long?"

"Yes. I had the driver take me around the park a few times, while I
was reading it."

"Skip it. How about--"

"I can't skip it," Darrig said, in a strange, tight voice. "I'm afraid
we were wrong. About the aliens, I mean. It's perfectly right and
proper that they should rule us. As a matter of fact, I wish they'd
hurry up and get here."

But Darrig didn't look certain. His voice shook and perspiration
poured from his face. He twisted his hands together, as though in
agony.

"It's hard to explain," he said. "Everything became clear as soon as I
started reading it. I saw how stupid we were, trying to be
independent in this interdependent Universe. I saw--oh, look, Cercy.
Let's stop all this foolishness and accept the Ambassador as our
friend."

"Calm down!" Cercy shouted at the perfectly calm physicist. "You don't
know what you're saying."

"It's strange," Darrig said. "I know how I felt--I just don't feel
that way any more. I think. Anyhow, I know _your_ trouble. You haven't
read the philosophy. You'll see what I mean, once you've read it." He
handed Cercy the pile of papers. Cercy promptly ignited them with his
cigarette lighter.

"It doesn't matter," Darrig said. "I've got it memorized. Just listen.
Axiom one. All peoples--"

Cercy hit him, a short, clean blow, and Darrig slumped to the floor.

"Those words must be semantically keyed," Malley said. "They're
designed to set off certain reactions in us, I suppose. All the
Ambassador does is alter the philosophy to suit the peoples he's
dealing with."

"Look, Malley," Cercy said. "This is your job now. Darrig knows, or
thought he knew, the answer. You have to get that out of him."

"That won't be easy," Malley said. "He'd feel that he was betraying
everything he believes in, if he were to tell us."

"I don't care how you get it," Cercy said. "Just get it."

"Even if it kills him?" Malley asked.

"Even if it kills you."

"Help me get him to my lab," Malley said.

       *       *       *       *       *

That night Cercy and Harrison kept watch on the Ambassador from the
control room. Cercy found his thoughts were racing in circles.

What had killed Alfern in space? Could it be duplicated on Earth? What
was the regularizing principle? What was the chaos underneath?

_What in hell am I doing here?_ he asked himself. But he couldn't
start that sort of thing.

"What do you figure the Ambassador is?" he asked Harrison. "Is he a
man?"

"Looks like one," Harrison said drowsily.

"But he doesn't act like one. I wonder if this is his true shape?"

Harrison shook his head, and lighted his pipe.

"What is there of him?" Cercy asked. "He looks like a man, but he can
change into anything else. You can't attack him; he adapts. He's like
water, taking the shape of any vessel he's poured into."

"You can boil water," Harrison yawned.

"Sure. Water hasn't any shape, has it? Or has it? What's basic?"

With an effort, Harrison tried to focus on Cercy's words. "Molecular
pattern? The matrix?"

"Matrix," Cercy repeated, yawning himself. "Pattern. Must be something
like that. A pattern is abstract, isn't it?"

"Sure. A pattern can be impressed on anything. What did I say?"

"Let's see," Cercy said. "Pattern. Matrix. Everything about the
Ambassador is capable of change. There must be some unifying force
that retains his personality. Something that _doesn't_ change, no
matter what contortions he goes through."

"Like a piece of string," Harrison murmured with his eyes closed.

"Sure. Tie it in knots, weave a rope out of it, wind it around your
finger; it's still string."

"Yeah."

"But how do you attack a pattern?" Cercy asked. And why couldn't he
get some sleep? To hell with the Ambassador and his hordes of
colonists, he was going to close his eyes for a moment....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Wake up, Colonel!"

Cercy pried his eyes open and looked up at Malley. Besides him,
Harrison was snoring deeply. "Did you get anything?"

"Not a thing," Malley confessed. "The philosophy must've had quite an
effect on him. But it didn't work all the way. Darrig knew that he
_had wanted_ to kill the Ambassador, and for good and sufficient
reasons. Although he felt differently now, he still had the feeling
that he was betraying us. On the one hand, he couldn't hurt the
Ambassador; on the other, he wouldn't hurt us."

"Won't he tell anything?"

"I'm afraid it's not that simple," Malley said. "You know, if you have
an insurmountable obstacle that _must_ be surmounted ... and also, I
think the philosophy had an injurious effect on his mind."

"What are you trying to say?" Cercy got to his feet.

"I'm sorry," Malley apologized, "there wasn't a damned thing I could
do. Darrig fought the whole thing out in his mind, and when he
couldn't fight any longer, he--retreated. I'm afraid he's hopelessly
insane."

"Let's see him."

They walked down the corridor to Malley's laboratory. Darrig was
relaxed on a couch, his eyes glazed and staring.

"Is there any way of curing him?" Cercy asked.

"Shock therapy, maybe." Malley was dubious. "It'll take a long time.
And he'll probably block out everything that had to do with producing
this."

Cercy turned away, feeling sick. Even if Darrig could be cured, it
would be too late. The aliens must have picked up the Ambassador's
message by now and were undoubtedly heading for Earth.

"What's this?" Cercy asked, picking up a piece of paper that lay by
Darrig's hand.

"Oh, he was doodling," Malley said. "Is there anything written on it?"

Cercy read aloud: "'Upon further consideration I can see that Chaos
and the Gorgon Medusa are closely related.'"

"What does that mean?" Malley asked.

"I don't know," Cercy puzzled. "He was always interested in folklore."

"Sounds schizophrenic," the psychiatrist said.

Cercy read it again. "'Upon further consideration, I can see that
Chaos and the Gorgon Medusa are closely related.'" He stared at it.
"Isn't it possible," he asked Malley, "that he was trying to give us a
clue? Trying to trick himself into giving and not giving at the same
time?"

"It's possible," Malley agreed. "An unsuccessful compromise--But what
could it mean?"

"Chaos." Cercy remembered Darrig's mentioning that word in his
telephone call. "That was the original state of the Universe in Greek
myth, wasn't it? The formlessness out of which everything came?"

"Something like that," Malley said. "And Medusa was one of those three
sisters with the horrible faces."

Cercy stood for a moment, staring at the paper. Chaos ... Medusa ...
and the organizing principle! Of course!

"I think--" He turned and ran from the room. Malley looked at him;
then loaded a hypodermic and followed.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the control room, Cercy shouted Harrison into consciousness.

"Listen," he said, "I want you to build something, quick. Do you hear
me?"

"Sure." Harrison blinked and sat up. "What's the rush?"

"I know what Darrig wanted to tell us," Cercy said. "Come on, I'll
tell you what I want. And Malley, put down that hypodermic. I haven't
cracked. I want you to get me a book on Greek mythology. And hurry it
up."

Finding a Greek mythology isn't an easy task at two o'clock in the
morning. With the aid of FBI men, Malley routed a book dealer out of
bed. He got his book and hurried back.

Cercy was red-eyed and excited, and Harrison and his helpers were
working away at three crazy looking rigs. Cercy snatched the book from
Malley, looked up one item, and put it down.

"Great work," he said. "We're all set now. Finished, Harrison?"

"Just about." Harrison and ten helpers were screwing in the last
parts. "Will you tell me what this is?"

"Me too," Malley put in.

"I don't mean to be secretive," Cercy said. "I'm just in a hurry. I'll
explain as we go along." He stood up. "Okay, let's wake up the
Ambassador."

       *       *       *       *       *

They watched the screen as a bolt of electricity leaped from the
ceiling to the Ambassador's bed. Immediately, the Ambassador vanished.

"Now he's a part of that stream of electrons, right?" Cercy asked.

"That's what he told us," Malley said.

"But still keeping his pattern, within the stream," Cercy continued.
"He has to, in order to get back into his own shape. Now we start the
first disrupter."

Harrison hooked the machine into circuit, and sent his helpers away.

"Here's a running graph of the electron stream," Cercy said. "See the
difference?" On the graph there was an irregular series of peaks and
valleys, constantly shifting and leveling. "Do you remember when you
hypnotized the Ambassador? He talked about his friend who'd been
killed in space."

"That's right," Malley nodded. "His friend had been killed by
something that had just popped up."

"He said something else," Cercy went on. "He told us that the basic
organizing force of the Universe usually stopped things like that.
What does that mean to you?"

"The organizing force," Malley repeated slowly. "Didn't Darrig say
that that was a new natural law?"

"He did. But think of the implications, as Darrig did. If an
organizing principle is engaged in some work, there must be something
that opposes it. That which opposes organization is--"

"Chaos!"

"That's what Darrig thought, and what we should have seen. The chaos
is underlying, and out of it there arose an organizing principle. This
principle, if I've got it right, sought to suppress the fundamental
chaos, to make all things regular.

"But the chaos still boils out in spots, as Alfern found out. Perhaps
the organizational pattern is weaker in space. Anyhow, those spots are
dangerous, until the organizing principle gets to work on them."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned to the panel. "Okay, Harrison. Throw in the second
disrupter." The peaks and valleys altered on the graph. They started
to mount in crazy, meaningless configurations.

"Take Darrig's message in the light of that. Chaos, we know, is
underlying. Everything was formed out of it. The Gorgon Medusa was
something that _couldn't be looked upon_. She turned men into stone,
you recall, destroyed them. So, Darrig found a relationship between
chaos and that which can't be looked upon. All with regard to the
Ambassador, of course."

"The Ambassador can't look upon chaos!" Malley cried.

"That's it. The Ambassador is capable of an infinite number of
alterations and permutations. But _something_--the matrix--can't
change, because then there would be nothing left. To destroy something
as abstract as a pattern, we need a state in which no pattern is
possible. A state of chaos."

The third disrupter was thrown into circuit. The graph looked as if a
drunken caterpillar had been sketching on it.

"Those disrupters are Harrison's idea," Cercy said. "I told him I
wanted an electrical current with absolutely no coherent pattern. The
disrupters are an extension of radio jamming. The first alters the
electrical pattern. That's its purpose: to produce a state of
patternlessness. The second tries to destroy the pattern left by the
first; the third tries to destroy the pattern made by the first two.
They're fed back then, and any remaining pattern is systematically
destroyed in circuit ... I hope."

"This is supposed to produce a state of chaos?" Malley asked, looking
into the screen.

For a while there was only the whining of the machines and the crazy
doodling of the graph. Then, in the middle of the Ambassador's room, a
spot appeared. It wavered, shrunk, expanded--

What happened was indescribable. All they knew was that everything
within the spot had disappeared.

"Switch it off" Cercy shouted. Harrison cut the switch.

The spot continued to grow.

"How is it we're able to look at it?" Malley asked, staring at the
screen.

"The shield of Perseus, remember?" Cercy said. "Using it as a mirror,
he could look at Medusa."

"It's still growing!" Malley shouted.

"There was a calculated risk in all this," Cercy said. "There's always
the possibility that the chaos may go on, unchecked. If that happens,
it won't matter much what--"

The spot stopped growing. Its edges wavered and rippled, and then it
started to shrink.

"The organizing principle," Cercy said, and collapsed into a chair.

"Any sign of the Ambassador?" he asked, in a few minutes.

The spot was still wavering. Then it was gone. Instantly there was an
explosion. The steel walls buckled inward, but held. The screen went
dead.

"The spot removed all the air from the room," Cercy explained, "as
well as the furniture and the Ambassador."

"He couldn't take it," Malley said. "No pattern can cohere, in a state
of patternlessness. He's gone to join Alfern."

Malley started to giggle. Cercy felt like joining him, but pulled
himself together.

"Take it easy," he said. "We're not through yet."

"Sure we are! The Ambassador--"

"Is out of the way. But there's still an alien fleet homing in on this
region of space. A fleet so strong we couldn't scratch it with an
H-bomb. They'll be looking for us."

He stood up.

"Go home and get some sleep. Something tells me that tomorrow we're
going to have to start figuring out some way of camouflaging a
planet."

                                                     --ROBERT SHECKLEY

       *       *       *       *       *FOREVER

By NED LANG


 _Of all the irksome, frustrating,
 maddening discoveries--was there
 no way of keeping it discovered?_


Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS


With so much at stake, Charles Dennison should not have been careless.
An inventor cannot afford carelessness, particularly when his invention
is extremely valuable and obviously patentable. There are too many
grasping hands ready to seize what belongs to someone else, too many men
who feast upon the creativity of the innocent.

A touch of paranoia would have served Dennison well; but he was lacking
in that vital characteristic of inventors. And he didn't even realize
the full extent of his carelessness until a bullet, fired from a
silenced weapon, chipped a granite wall not three inches from his head.

Then he knew. But by then it was too late.

Charles Dennison had been left a more than adequate income by his
father. He had gone to Harvard, served a hitch in the Navy, then
continued his education at M.I.T. Since the age of thirty-two, he had
been engaged in private research, working in his own small laboratory in
Riverdale, New York. Plant biology was his field. He published several
noteworthy papers, and sold a new insecticide to a development
corporation. The royalties helped him to expand his facilities.

Dennison enjoyed working alone. It suited his temperament, which was
austere but not unfriendly. Two or three times a year, he would come to
New York, see some plays and movies, and do a little serious drinking.
He would then return gratefully to his seclusion. He was a bachelor and
seemed destined to remain that way.

Not long after his fortieth birthday, Dennison stumbled across an
intriguing clue which led him into a different branch of biology. He
pursued his clue, developed it, extended it slowly into a hypothesis.
After three more years, a lucky accident put the final proofs into his
hands.

He had invented a most effective longevity drug. It was not proof
against violence; aside from that, however, it could fairly be called an
immortality serum.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now was the time for caution. But years of seclusion had made Dennison
unwary of people and their motives. He was more or less heedless of the
world around him; it never occurred to him that the world was not
equally heedless of him.

He thought only about his serum. It was valuable and patentable. But was
it the sort of thing that should be revealed? Was the world ready for an
immortality drug?

He had never enjoyed speculation of this sort. But since the atom bomb,
many scientists had been forced to look at the ethics of their
profession. Dennison looked at his and decided that immortality was
inevitable.

Mankind had, throughout its existence, poked and probed into the
recesses of nature, trying to figure out how things worked. If one man
didn't discover fire, or the use of the lever, or gunpowder, or the atom
bomb, or immortality, another would. Man willed to know all nature's
secrets, and there was no way of keeping them hidden.

Armed with this bleak but comforting philosophy, Dennison packed his
formulas and proofs into a briefcase, slipped a two-ounce bottle of the
product into a jacket pocket, and left his Riverdale laboratory. It was
already evening. He planned to spend the night in a good midtown hotel,
see a movie, and proceed to the Patent Office in Washington the
following day.

On the subway, Dennison was absorbed in a newspaper. He was barely
conscious of the men sitting on either side of him. He became aware of
them only when the man on his right poked him firmly in the ribs.

Dennison glanced over and saw the snub nose of a small automatic,
concealed from the rest of the car by a newspaper, resting against his
side.

"What is this?" Dennison asked.

"Hand it over," the man said.

Dennison was stunned. How could anyone have known about his discovery?
And how could they dare try to rob him in a public subway car?

Then he realized that they were probably just after his money.

"I don't have much on me," Dennison said hoarsely, reaching for his
wallet.

The man on his left leaned over and slapped the briefcase. "Not money,"
he said. "The immortality stuff."

       *       *       *       *       *

In some unaccountable fashion, they knew. What if he refused to give up
his briefcase? Would they dare fire the automatic in the subway? It was
a very small caliber weapon. Its noise might not even be heard above the
subway's roar. And probably they felt justified in taking the risk for a
prize as great as the one Dennison carried.

He looked at them quickly. They were mild-looking men, quietly, almost
somberly dressed. Something about their clothing jogged Dennison's
memory unpleasantly, but he didn't have time to place the recollection.
The automatic was digging painfully into his ribs.

The subway was coming to a station. Dennison glanced at the man on his
left and caught the glint of light on a tiny hypodermic.

Many inventors, involved only in their own thoughts, are slow of
reaction. But Dennison had been a gunnery officer in the Navy and had
seen his share of action. He was damned if he was going to give up his
invention so easily.

He jumped from his seat and the hypo passed through the sleeve of his
coat, just missing his arm. He swung the briefcase at the man with the
automatic, catching him across the forehead with the metal edge. As the
doors opened, he ran past a popeyed subway guard, up the stairs and into
the street.

The two men followed, one of them streaming blood from his forehead.
Dennison ran, looking wildly around for a policeman.

The men behind him were screaming, "Stop, thief! Police! Police! Stop
that man!"

Apparently they were also prepared to face the police and to claim the
briefcase and bottle as their own. Ridiculous! Yet the complete and
indignant confidence in their shrill voices unnerved Dennison. He hated
a scene.

Still, a policeman would be best. The briefcase was filled with proof of
who he was. Even his name was initialed on the outside of the briefcase.
One glance would tell anyone ...

He caught a flash of metal from his briefcase, and, still running,
looked at it. He was shocked to see a metal plate fixed to the cowhide,
over the place where his initials had been. The man on his left must
have done that when he slapped the briefcase.

Dennison dug at the plate with his fingertips, but it would not come
off.

It read, _Property of Edward James Flaherty, Smithfield Institute_.

Perhaps a policeman wouldn't be so much help, after all.

But the problem was academic, for Dennison saw no policeman along the
crowded Bronx street. People stood aside as he ran past, staring
open-mouthed, offering neither assistance nor interference. But the men
behind him were still screaming, "Stop the thief! Stop the thief!"

The entire long block was alerted. The people, like some sluggish beast
goaded reluctantly into action, began to make tentative movements toward
Dennison, impelled by the outraged cries of his pursuers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unless he balanced the scales of public opinion, some do-gooder was
going to interfere soon. Dennison conquered his shyness and pride, and
called out, "Help me! They're trying to rob me! Stop them!"

But his voice lacked the moral indignation, the absolute conviction of
his two shrill-voiced pursuers. A burly young man stepped forward to
block Dennison's way, but at the last moment a woman pulled him back.

"Don't get into trouble, Charley."

"Why don't someone call a cop?"

"Yeah, where are the cops?"

"Over at a big fire on 178th Street, I hear."

"We oughta stop that guy."

"I'm willing if you're willing."

Dennison's way was suddenly blocked by four grinning youths, teen-agers
in black motorcycle jackets and boots, excited by the chance for a
little action, delighted at the opportunity to hit someone in the name
of law and order.

[Illustration]

Dennison saw them, swerved suddenly and sprinted across the street. A
bus loomed in front of him.

He hurled himself out of its way, fell, got up again and ran on.

His pursuers were delayed by the dense flow of traffic. Their
high-pitched cries faded as Dennison turned into a side street, ran down
its length, then down another.

He was in a section of massive apartment buildings. His lungs felt like
a blast furnace and his left side seemed to be sewed together with
red-hot wire. There was no help for it, he had to rest.

It was then that the first bullet, fired from a silenced weapon, chipped
a granite wall not three inches from his head. That was when Dennison
realized the full extent of his carelessness.

He pulled the bottle out of his pocket. He had hoped to carry out more
experiments on the serum before trying it on human beings. Now there was
no choice.

Dennison yanked out the stopper and drained the contents.

Immediately he was running again, as a second bullet scored the granite
wall. The great blocks of apartments loomed endlessly ahead of him,
silent and alien. There were no walkers upon the streets. There was only
Dennison, running more slowly now past the immense, blank-faced
apartments.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long black car came up behind him, its searchlight probing into doors
and alleys. Was it the police?

"That's him!" cried the shrill, unnerving voice of one of Dennison's
pursuers.

Dennison ducked into a narrow alley between buildings, raced down it and
into the next street.

There were two cars on that street, at either end of the block, their
headlights shining toward each other, moving slowly to trap him in the
middle. The alley gleamed with light now, from the first car's
headlights shining down it. He was surrounded.

Dennison raced to the nearest apartment building and yanked at the door.
It was locked. The two cars were almost even with him. And, looking at
them, Dennison remembered the unpleasant jog his memory had given him
earlier.

The two cars were hearses.

The men in the subway, with their solemn faces, solemn clothing, subdued
neckties, shrill, indignant voices--they had reminded him of
undertakers. They _had_ been undertakers!

Of course! Of course! Oil companies might want to block the invention of
a cheap new fuel which could put them out of business; steel
corporations might try to stop the development of an inexpensive,
stronger-than-steel plastic ...

And the production of an immortality serum would put the undertakers out
of business.

His progress, and the progress of thousands of other researchers in
biology, must have been watched. And when he made his discovery, they
had been ready.

The hearses stopped, and somber-faced, respectable-looking men in black
suits and pearl-gray neckties poured out and seized him. The briefcase
was yanked out of his hand. He felt the prick of a needle in his
shoulder. Then, with no transitional dizziness, he passed out.

       *       *       *       *       *

He came to sitting in an armchair. There were armed men on either side
of him. In front of him stood a small, plump, undistinguished-looking
man in sedate clothing.

"My name is Mr. Bennet," the plump man said. "I wish to beg your
forgiveness, Mr. Dennison, for the violence to which you were subjected.
We found out about your invention only at the last moment and therefore
had to improvise. The bullets were meant only to frighten and delay you.
Murder was not our intention."

"You merely wanted to steal my discovery," Dennison said.

"Not at all," Mr. Bennet told him. "The secret of immortality has been
in our possession for quite some time."

"I see. Then you want to keep immortality from the public in order to
safeguard your damned undertaking business!"

"Isn't that rather a naive view?" Mr. Bennet asked, smiling. "As it
happens, my associates and I are _not_ undertakers. We took on the
disguise in order to present an understandable motive if our plan to
capture you had misfired. In that event, others would have believed
exactly--and only--what you thought: that our purpose was to safeguard
our business."

Dennison frowned and watchfully waited.

"Disguises come easily to us," Mr. Bennet said, still smiling. "Perhaps
you have heard rumors about a new carburetor suppressed by the gasoline
companies, or a new food source concealed by the great food suppliers,
or a new synthetic hastily destroyed by the cotton-owning interests.
That was us. And the inventions ended up here."

"You're trying to impress me," Dennison said.

"Certainly."

"Why did you stop me from patenting my immortality serum?"

"The world is not ready for it yet," said Mr. Bennet.

"It isn't ready for a lot of things," Dennison said. "Why didn't you
block the atom bomb?"

"We tried, disguised as mercenary coal and oil interests. But we failed.
However, we have succeeded with a surprising number of things."

"But what's the purpose behind it all?"

"Earth's welfare," Mr. Bennet said promptly. "Consider what would happen
if the people were given your veritable immortality serum. The problems
of birth rate, food production, living space all would be aggravated.
Tensions would mount, war would be imminent--"

"So what?" Dennison challenged. "That's how things are right now,
_without_ immortality. Besides, there have been cries of doom about
every new invention or discovery. Gunpowder, the printing press,
nitroglycerin, the atom bomb, they were all supposed to destroy the
race. But mankind has learned how to handle them. It had to! You can't
turn back the clock, and you can't un-discover something. If it's there,
mankind must deal with it!"

"Yes, in a bumbling, bloody, inefficient fashion," said Mr. Bennet, with
an expression of distaste.

"Well, that's how Man is."

"Not if he's properly led," Mr. Bennet said.

"No?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Certainly not," said Mr. Bennet. "You see, the immortality serum
provides a solution to the problem of political power. Rule by a
permanent and enlightened elite is by far the best form of government;
infinitely better than the blundering inefficiencies of democratic rule.
But throughout history, this elite, whether monarchy, oligarchy,
dictatorship or junta, has been unable to perpetuate itself. Leaders
die, the followers squabble for power, and chaos is close behind. With
immortality, this last flaw would be corrected. There would be no
discontinuity of leadership, for the leaders would always be there."

"A permanent dictatorship," Dennison said.

"Yes. A permanent, benevolent rule by small, carefully chosen elite
corps, based upon the sole and exclusive possession of immortality. It's
historically inevitable. The only question is, who is going to get
control first?"

"And you think you are?" Dennison demanded.

"Of course. Our organization is still small, but absolutely solid. It is
bolstered by every new invention that comes into our hands and by every
scientist who joins our ranks. Our time will come, Dennison! We'd like
to have you with us, among the elite."

"You want _me_ to join you?" Dennison asked, bewildered.

"We do. Our organization needs creative scientific minds to help us in
our work, to help us save mankind from itself."

"Count me out," Dennison said, his heart beating fast.

"You won't join us?"

"I'd like to see you all hanged."

Mr. Bennet nodded thoughtfully and pursed his small lips. "You have
taken your own serum, have you not?"

Dennison nodded. "I suppose that means you kill me now?"

"We don't kill," Mr. Bennet said. "We merely wait. I think you are a
reasonable man, and I think you'll come to see things our way. We'll be
around a long time. So will you. Take him away."

Dennison was led to an elevator that dropped deep into the Earth. He was
marched down a long passageway lined with armed men. They went through
four massive doors. At the fifth, Dennison was pushed inside alone, and
the door was locked behind him.

He was in a large, well-furnished apartment. There were perhaps twenty
people in the room, and they came forward to meet him.

One of them, a stocky, bearded man, was an old college acquaintance of
Dennison's.

"Jim Ferris?"

"That's right," Ferris said. "Welcome to the Immortality Club,
Dennison."

"I read you were killed in an air crash last year."

"I merely--disappeared," Ferris said, with a rueful smile, "after
inventing the immortality serum. Just like the others."

"All of them?"

"Fifteen of the men here invented the serum independently. The rest are
successful inventors in other fields. Our oldest member is Doctor Li, a
serum discoverer, who disappeared from San Francisco in 1911. You are
our latest acquisition. Our clubhouse is probably the most carefully
guarded place on Earth."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dennison said, "Nineteen-eleven!" Despair flooded him and he sat down
heavily in a chair. "Then there's no possibility of rescue?"

"None. There are only four choices available to us," Ferris said. "Some
have left us and joined the Undertakers. Others have suicided. A few
have gone insane. The rest of us have formed the Immortality Club."

"What for?" Dennison bewilderedly asked.

"To get out of this place!" said Ferris. "To escape and give our
discoveries to the world. To stop those hopeful little dictators
upstairs."

"They must know what you're planning."

"Of course. But they let us live because, every so often, one of us
gives up and joins them. And they don't think we can ever break out.
They're much too smug. It's the basic defect of all power-elites, and
their eventual undoing."

"You said this was the most closely guarded place on Earth?"

"It is," Ferris said.

"And some of you have been trying to break out for fifty years? Why,
it'll take forever to escape!"

"Forever is exactly how long we have," said Ferris. "But we hope it
won't take quite that long. Every new man brings new ideas, plans. One
of them is bound to work."

"_Forever_," Dennison said, his face buried in his hands.

"You can go back upstairs and join them," Ferris said, with a hard note
to his voice, "or you can suicide, or just sit in a corner and go
quietly mad. Take your pick."

Dennison looked up. "I must be honest with you and with myself. I don't
think we can escape. Furthermore, I don't think any of you really
believe we can."

Ferris shrugged his shoulders.

"Aside from that," Dennison said, "I think it's a damned good idea. If
you'll bring me up to date, I'll contribute whatever I can to the
Forever Project. And let's hope their complacency lasts."

"It will," Ferris said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The escape did not take forever, of course. In one hundred and
thirty-seven years, Dennison and his colleagues made their successful
breakout and revealed the Undertakers' Plot. The Undertakers were tried
before the High Court on charges of kidnapping, conspiracy to overthrow
the government, and illegal possession of immortality. They were found
guilty on all counts and summarily executed.

Dennison and his colleagues were also in illegal possession of
immortality, which is the privilege only of our governmental elite. But
the death penalty was waived in view of the Immortality Club's service
to the State.

This mercy was premature, however. After some months the members of the
Immortality Club went into hiding, with the avowed purpose of
overthrowing the Elite Rule and disseminating immortality among the
masses. Project Forever, as they termed it, has received some support
from dissidents, who have not yet been apprehended. It cannot be
considered a serious threat.

But this deviationist action in no way detracts from the glory of the
Club's escape from the Undertakers. The ingenious way in which Dennison
and his colleagues broke out of their seemingly impregnable prison,
using only a steel belt buckle, a tungsten filament, three hens' eggs,
and twelve chemicals that can be readily obtained from the human body,
is too well known to be repeated here.

                                                            --NED LANG




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ February 1959.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.THE HOUR OF BATTLE

BY ROBERT SHECKLEY

ILLUSTRATED BY KRENKEL


    As one of the Guardian ships protecting Earth, the crew had a
    problem to solve. Just how do you protect a race from an enemy who
    can take over a man's mind without seeming effort or warning?


"That hand didn't move, did it?" Edwardson asked, standing at the port,
looking at the stars.

"No," Morse said. He had been staring fixedly at the Attison Detector
for over an hour. Now he blinked three times rapidly, and looked again.
"Not a millimeter."

"I don't think it moved either," Cassel added, from behind the gunfire
panel. And that was that. The slender black hand of the indicator rested
unwaveringly on zero. The ship's guns were ready, their black mouths
open to the stars. A steady hum filled the room. It came from the
Attison Detector, and the sound was reassuring. It reinforced the fact
that the Detector was attached to all the other Detectors, forming a
gigantic network around Earth.

"Why in hell don't they come?" Edwardson asked, still looking at the
stars. "Why don't they hit?"

"Aah, shut up," Morse said. He had a tired, glum look. High on his right
temple was an old radiation burn, a sunburst of pink scar tissue. From a
distance it looked like a decoration.

"I just wish they'd come," Edwardson said. He returned from the port to
his chair, bending to clear the low metal ceiling. "Don't you wish
they'd come?" Edwardson had the narrow, timid face of a mouse; but a
highly intelligent mouse. One that cats did well to avoid.

[Illustration]

"Don't you?" he repeated.

The other men didn't answer. They had settled back to their dreams,
staring hypnotically at the Detector face.

"They've had enough time," Edwardson said, half to himself.

Cassel yawned and licked his lips. "Anyone want to play some gin?" he
asked, stroking his beard. The beard was a memento of his undergraduate
days. Cassel maintained he could store almost fifteen minutes worth of
oxygen in its follicles. He had never stepped into space unhelmeted to
prove it.

Morse looked away, and Edwardson automatically watched the indicator.
This routine had been drilled into them, branded into their
subconscious. They would as soon have cut their throats as leave the
indicator unguarded.

"Do you think they'll come soon?" Edwardson asked, his brown rodent's
eyes on the indicator. The men didn't answer him. After two months
together in space their conversational powers were exhausted. They
weren't interested in Cassel's undergraduate days, or in Morse's
conquests.

They were bored to death even with their own thoughts and dreams, bored
with the attack they expected momentarily.

"Just one thing _I'd_ like to know," Edwardson said, slipping with ease
into an old conversational gambit. "How far can they do it?"

They had talked for weeks about the enemy's telepathic range, but they
always returned to it.

As professional soldiers, they couldn't help but speculate on the enemy
and his weapons. It was their shop talk.

"Well," Morse said wearily, "Our Detector network covers the system out
beyond Mars' orbit."

"Where we sit," Cassel said, watching the indicators now that the others
were talking.

"They might not even know we have a detection unit working," Morse said,
as he had said a thousand times.

"Oh, stop," Edwardson said, his thin face twisted in scorn. "They're
telepathic. They must have read every bit of stuff in Everset's mind."

"Everset didn't know we had a detection unit," Morse said, his eyes
returning to the dial. "He was captured before we had it."

"Look," Edwardson said, "They ask him, 'Boy, what would you do if you
knew a telepathic race was coming to take over Earth? How would you
guard the planet?'"

"Idle speculation," Cassel said. "Maybe Everset didn't think of this."

"He thinks like a man, doesn't he? Everyone agreed on this defense.
Everset would, too."

"Syllogistic," Cassel murmured. "Very shaky."

"I sure wish he hadn't been captured," Edwardson said.

"It could have been worse," Morse put in, his face sadder than ever.
"What if they'd captured _both_ of them?"

"I wish they'd come," Edwardson said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Richard Everset and C. R. Jones had gone on the first interstellar
flight. They had found an inhabited planet in the region of Vega. The
rest was standard procedure.

A flip of the coin had decided it. Everset went down in the scouter,
maintaining radio contact with Jones, in the ship.

The recording of that contact was preserved for all Earth to hear.

"Just met the natives," Everset said. "Funny-looking bunch. Give you the
physical description later."

"Are they trying to talk to you?" Jones asked, guiding the ship in a
slow spiral over the planet.

"No. Hold it. Well I'm damned! They're telepathic! How do you like
that?"

"Great," Jones said. "Go on."

"Hold it. Say, Jonesy, I don't know as I like these boys. They haven't
got nice minds. Brother!"

"What is it?" Jones asked, lifting the ship a little higher.

"Minds! These bastards are power-crazy. Seems they've hit all the
systems around here, looking for someone to--"

"Yeh?"

"I've got that a bit wrong," Everset said pleasantly. "They are not so
bad."

Jones had a quick mind, a suspicious nature and good reflexes. He set
the accelerator for all the G's he could take, lay down on the floor and
said, "Tell me more."

"Come on down," Everset said, in violation of every law of spaceflight.
"These guys are all right. As a matter of fact, they're the most
marvelous--"

That was where the recording ended, because Jones was pinned to the
floor by twenty G's acceleration as he boosted the ship to the level
needed for the C-jump.

He broke three ribs getting home, but he got there.

A telepathic species was on the march. What was Earth going to do about
it?

A lot of speculation necessarily clothed the bare bones of Jones'
information. Evidently the species could take over a mind with ease.
With Everset, it seemed that they had insinuated their thoughts into
his, delicately altering his previous convictions. They had possessed
him with remarkable ease.

How about Jones? Why hadn't they taken him? Was distance a factor? Or
hadn't they been prepared for the suddenness of his departure?

One thing was certain. Everything Everset knew, the enemy knew. That
meant they knew where Earth was, and how defenseless the planet was to
their form of attack.

It could be expected that they were on their way.

Something was needed to nullify their tremendous advantage. But what
sort of something? What armor is there against thought? How do you dodge
a wavelength?

Pouch-eyed scientists gravely consulted their periodic tables.

And how do you know when a man has been possessed? Although the enemy
was clumsy with Everset, would they continue to be clumsy? Wouldn't they
learn?

Psychologists tore their hair and bewailed the absence of an absolute
scale for humanity.

Of course, something had to be done at once. The answer, from a
technological planet, was a technological one. Build a space fleet and
equip it with some sort of a detection-fire network.

This was done in record time. The Attison Detector was developed, a
cross between radar and the electroencephalograph. Any alteration from
the typical human brain wave pattern of the occupants of a
Detector-equipped ship would boost the indicator around the dial. Even a
bad dream or a case of indigestion would jar it.

It seemed probable that any attempt to take over a human mind would
disturb something. There had to be a point of interaction, somewhere.

That was what the Attison Detector was supposed to detect. Maybe it
would.

The spaceships, three men to a ship, dotted space between Earth and
Mars, forming a gigantic sphere with Earth in the center.

Tens of thousands of men crouched behind gunfire panels, watching the
dials on the Attison Detector.

The unmoving dials.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Do you think I could fire a couple of bursts?" Edwardson asked, his
fingers on the gunfire button. "Just to limber the guns?"

"Those guns don't need limbering," Cassel said, stroking his beard.
"Besides, you'd throw the whole fleet into a panic."

"Cassel," Morse said, very quietly. "Get your hand off your beard."

"Why should I?" Cassel asked.

"Because," Morse answered, almost in a whisper, "I am about to ram it
right down your fat throat."

Cassel grinned and tightened his fists. "Pleasure," he said. "I'm tired
of looking at that scar of yours." He stood up.

"Cut it," Edwardson said wearily. "Watch the birdie."

"No reason to, really," Morse said, leaning back. "There's an alarm bell
attached." But he looked at the dial.

"What if the bell doesn't work?" Edwardson asked. "What if the dial is
jammed? How would you like something cold slithering into your mind?"

"The dial'll work," Cassel said. His eyes shifted from Edwardson's face
to the motionless indicator.

"I think I'll sack in," Edwardson said.

"Stick around," Cassel said. "Play you some gin."

"All right." Edwardson found and shuffled the greasy cards, while Morse
took a turn glaring at the dial.

"I sure wish they'd come," he said.

"Cut," Edwardson said, handing the pack to Cassel.

"I wonder what our friends look like," Morse said, watching the dial.

"Probably remarkably like us," Edwardson said, dealing the cards. Cassel
picked them up one by one, slowly, as if he hoped something interesting
would be under them.

"They should have given us another man," Cassel said. "We could play
bridge."

"I don't play bridge," Edwardson said.

"You could learn."

"Why didn't we send a task force?" Morse asked. "Why didn't we bomb
their planet?"

"Don't be dumb," Edwardson said. "We'd lose any ship we sent. Probably
get them back at us, possessed and firing."

"Knock with nine," Cassel said.

"I don't give a good damn if you knock with a thousand," Edwardson said
gaily. "How much do I owe you now?"

"Three million five hundred and eight thousand and ten. Dollars."

"I sure wish they'd come," Morse said.

"Want me to write a check?"

"Take your time. Take until next week."

"Someone should reason with the bastards," Morse said, looking out the
port. Cassel immediately looked at the dial.

"I just thought of something," Edwardson said.

"Yeh?"

"I bet it feels horrible to have your mind grabbed," Edwardson said. "I
bet it's awful."

"You'll know when it happens," Cassel said.

"Did Everset?"

"Probably. He just couldn't do anything about it."

"My mind feels fine," Cassel said. "But the first one of you guys starts
acting queer--watch out."

They all laughed.

"Well," Edwardson said, "I'd sure like a chance to reason with them.
This is stupid."

"Why not?" Cassel asked.

"You mean go out and meet _them_?"

"Sure," Cassel said. "We're doing no good sitting here."

"I should think we could do something," Edwardson said slowly. "After
all, they're not invincible. They're reasoning beings."

Morse punched a course on the ship's tape, then looked up.

"You think we should contact the command? Tell them what we're doing?"

"No!" Cassel said, and Edwardson nodded in agreement. "Red tape. We'll
just go out and see what we can do. If they won't talk, we'll blast 'em
out of space."

"Look!"

Out of the port they could see the red flare of a reaction engine; the
next ship in their sector, speeding forward.

"They must have got the same idea," Edwardson said.

"Let's get there first," Cassel said. Morse shoved the accelerator in
and they were thrown back in their seats.

"That dial hasn't moved yet, has it?" Edwardson asked, over the clamor
of the Detector alarm bell.

"Not a move out of it," Cassel said, looking at the dial with its
indicator slammed all the way over to the highest notch.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Space Science Fiction_ September 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction November 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                           KEEP YOUR SHAPE


                          By ROBERT SHECKLEY


                        Illustrated by VIDMER


     _Only a race as incredibly elastic as the Grom could have a
      single rule of war:_

       *       *       *       *       *




Pid the Pilot slowed the ship almost to a standstill, and peered
anxiously at the green planet below.

Even without instruments, there was no mistaking it. Third from its
sun, it was the only planet in this system capable of sustaining life.
Peacefully it swam beneath its gauze of clouds.

It looked very innocent. And yet, twenty previous Grom expeditions had
set out to prepare this planet for invasion--and vanished utterly,
without a word.

Pid hesitated only a moment, before starting irrevocably down. There
was no point in hovering and worrying. He and his two crewmen were as
ready now as they would ever be. Their compact Displacers were stored
in body pouches, inactive but ready.

Pid wanted to say something to his crew, but wasn't sure how to put
it.

The crew waited. Ilg the Radioman had sent the final message to the
Grom planet. Ger the Detector read sixteen dials at once, and
reported, "No sign of alien activity." His body surfaces flowed
carelessly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Noticing the flow, Pid knew what to say to his crew. Ever since they
had left Grom, shape-discipline had been disgustingly lax. The
Invasion Chief had warned him; but still, he had to do something about
it. It was his duty, since lower castes such as Radiomen and Detectors
were notoriously prone to Shapelessness.

"A lot of hopes are resting on this expedition," he began slowly.
"We're a long way from home now."

Ger the Detector nodded. Ilg the Radioman flowed out of his prescribed
shape and molded himself comfortably to a wall.

"However," Pid said sternly, "distance is no excuse for promiscuous
Shapelessness."

Ilg flowed hastily back into proper Radioman's shape.

"Exotic forms will undoubtedly be called for," Pid went on. "And for
that we have a special dispensation. But remember--any shape not
assumed strictly in the line of duty is a foul, lawless device of The
Shapeless One!"

Ger's body surfaces abruptly stopped flowing.

"That's all," Pid said, and flowed into his controls. The ship started
down, so smoothly co-ordinated that Pid felt a glow of pride.

They were good workers, he decided. He just couldn't expect them to be
as shape-conscious as a high-caste Pilot. Even the Invasion Chief had
told him that.

"Pid," the Invasion Chief had said at their last interview, "we need
this planet desperately."

"Yes, sir," Pid had said, standing at full attention, never quivering
from Optimum Pilot's Shape.

"One of you," the Chief said heavily, "must get through and set up a
Displacer near an atomic power source. The army will be standing by at
this end, ready to step through."

"We'll do it, sir," Pid said.

"This expedition has to succeed," the Chief said, and his features
blurred momentarily from sheer fatigue. "In strictest confidence,
there's considerable unrest on Grom. The Miner caste is on strike, for
instance. They want a new digging shape. Say the old one is
inefficient."

[Illustration]

Pid looked properly indignant. The Mining Shape had been set down by
the Ancients fifty thousand years ago, together with the rest of the
basic shapes. And now these upstarts wanted to change it!

"That's not all," the Chief told him. "We've uncovered a new Cult of
Shapelessness. Picked up almost eight thousand Grom, and I don't know
how many more we missed."

Pid knew that Shapelessness was a lure of The Shapeless One, the
greatest evil that the Grom mind could conceive of. But why, he
wondered, did so many Grom fall for His lures?

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chief guessed his question. "Pid," he said, "I suppose it's
difficult for you to understand. Do you enjoy Piloting?"

"Yes, sir," Pid said simply. _Enjoy_ Piloting! It was his entire life!
Without a ship, he was nothing.

"Not all Grom feel that way," the Chief said. "I don't understand it
either. All my ancestors have been Invasion Chiefs, back to the
beginning of time. So of course _I_ want to be an Invasion Chief. It's
only natural, as well as lawful. But the lower castes don't feel that
way." The Chief shook his body sadly. "I've told you this for a
reason. We Grom need more room. This unrest is caused purely by
crowding. All our psychologists say so. Another planet to expand into
will cure everything. So we're counting on you, Pid."

"Yes, sir," Pid said, with a glow of pride.

The Chief rose to end the interview. Then he changed his mind and sat
down again.

"You'll have to watch your crew," he said. "They're loyal, no doubt,
but low-caste. And you know the lower castes."

Pid did indeed.

"Ger, your Detector, is suspected of harboring Alterationist
tendencies. He was once fined for assuming a quasi-Hunter shape. Ilg
has never had any definite charge brought against him. But I hear that
he remains immobile for suspiciously long periods of time. Possibly,
he fancies himself a Thinker."

"But, sir," Pid protested. "If they are even slightly tainted with
Alterationism or Shapelessness, why send them on this expedition?"

The Chief hesitated before answering. "There are plenty of Grom I
could trust," he said slowly. "But those two have certain qualities of
resourcefulness and imagination that will be needed on this
expedition." He sighed. "I really don't understand why those qualities
are usually linked with Shapelessness."

"Yes, sir," Pid said.

"Just watch them."

"Yes, sir," Pid said again, and saluted, realizing that the interview
was at an end. In his body pouch he felt the dormant Displacer, ready
to transform the enemy's power source into a bridge across space for
the Grom hordes.

"Good luck," the chief said. "I'm sure you'll need it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The ship dropped silently toward the surface of the enemy planet. Ger
the Detector analyzed the clouds below, and fed data into the
Camouflage Unit. The Unit went to work. Soon the ship looked, to all
outward appearances, like a cirrus formation.

Pid allowed the ship to drift slowly toward the surface of the mystery
planet. He was in Optimum Pilot's Shape now, the most efficient of the
four shapes alloted to the Pilot caste. Blind, deaf and dumb, an
extension of his controls, all his attention was directed toward
matching the velocities of the high-flying clouds, staying among them,
becoming a part of them.

Ger remained rigidly in one of the two shapes alloted to Detectors. He
fed data into the Camouflage Unit, and the descending ship slowly
altered into an alto-cumulus.

There was no sign of activity from the enemy planet.

Ilg located an atomic power source, and fed the data to Pid. The Pilot
altered course. He had reached the lowest level of clouds, barely a
mile above the surface of the planet. Now his ship looked like a fat,
fleecy cumulus.

And still there was no sign of alarm. The unknown fate that had
overtaken twenty previous expeditions still had not showed itself.

Dusk crept across the face of the planet as Pid maneuvered near the
atomic power installation. He avoided the surrounding homes and
hovered over a clump of woods.

Darkness fell, and the green planet's lone moon was veiled in clouds.

One cloud floated lower.

And landed.

"Quick, everyone out!" Pid shouted, detaching himself from the ship's
controls. He assumed the Pilot's Shape best suited for running, and
raced out the hatch. Ger and Ilg hurried after him. They stopped fifty
yards from the ship, and waited.

Inside the ship a little-used circuit closed. There was a silent
shudder, and the ship began to melt. Plastic dissolved, metal
crumpled. Soon the ship was a great pile of junk, and still the
process went on. Big fragments broke into smaller fragments, and
split, and split again.

Pid felt suddenly helpless, watching his ship scuttle itself. He was
a Pilot, of the Pilot caste. His father had been a Pilot, and his
father before him, stretching back to the hazy past when the Grom had
first constructed ships. He had spent his entire childhood around
ships, his entire manhood flying them.

Now, shipless, he was naked in an alien world.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a few minutes there was only a mound of dust to show where the ship
had been. The night wind scattered it through the forest. And then
there was nothing at all.

They waited. Nothing happened. The wind sighed and the trees creaked.
Squirrels chirped, and birds stirred in their nests. An acorn fell to
the ground.

Pid heaved a sigh of relief and sat down. The twenty-first Grom
expedition had landed safely.

There was nothing to be done until morning, so Pid began to make
plans. They had landed as close to the atomic power installation as
they dared. Now they would have to get closer. Somehow, one of them
had to get very near the reactor room, in order to activate the
Displacer.

Difficult. But Pid felt certain of success. After all, the Grom were
strong on ingenuity.

Strong on ingenuity, he thought bitterly, but terribly short of
radioactives. That was another reason why this expedition was so
important. There was little radioactive fuel left, on any of the Grom
worlds. Ages ago, the Grom had spent their store of radioactives in
spreading throughout their neighboring worlds, occupying the ones that
they could live on.

Now, colonization barely kept up with the mounting birthrate. New
worlds were constantly needed.

This particular world, discovered in a scouting expedition, was
needed. It suited the Grom perfectly. But it was too far away. They
didn't have enough fuel to mount a conquering space fleet.

Luckily, there was another way. A better way.

Over the centuries, the Grom scientists had developed the Displacer. A
triumph of Identity Engineering, the Displacer allowed mass to be
moved instantaneously between any two linked points.

One end was set up at Grom's sole atomic energy plant. The other end
had to be placed in proximity to another atomic power source, and
activated. Diverted power then flowed through both ends, was modified,
and modified again.

Then, through the miracle of Identity Engineering, the Grom could
_step_ through from planet to planet; or pour through in a great,
overwhelming wave.

It was quite simple.

But twenty expeditions had failed to set up the Earth-end Displacer.

What had happened to them was not known.

For no Grom ship had ever returned to tell.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before dawn they crept through the woods, taking on the coloration of
the plants around them. Their Displacers pulsed feebly, sensing the
nearness of atomic energy.

A tiny, four-legged creature darted in front of them. Instantly, Ger
grew four legs and a long, streamlined body and gave chase.

"Ger! Come back here!" Pid howled at the Detector, throwing caution to
the winds.

Ger overtook the animal and knocked it down. He tried to bite it, but
he had neglected to grow teeth. The animal jumped free, and vanished
into the underbrush. Ger thrust out a set of teeth and bunched his
muscles for another leap.

"_Ger!_"

Reluctantly, the Detector turned away. He loped silently back to Pid.

"I was hungry," he said.

"You were not," Pid said sternly.

"Was," Ger mumbled, writhing with embarrassment.

Pid remembered what the Chief had told him. Ger certainly did have
Hunter tendencies. He would have to watch him more closely.

"We'll have no more of that," Pid said. "Remember--the lure of Exotic
Shapes is not sanctioned. Be content with the shape you were born to."

Ger nodded, and melted back into the underbrush. They moved on.

At the extreme edge of the woods they could observe the atomic energy
installation. Pid disguised himself as a clump of shrubbery, and Ger
formed himself into an old log. Ilg, after a moment's thought, became
a young oak.

The installation was in the form of a long, low building, surrounded
by a metal fence. There was a gate, and guards in front of it.

The first job, Pid thought, was to get past that gate. He began to
consider ways and means.

From the fragmentary reports of the survey parties, Pid knew that, in
some ways, this race of Men were like the Grom. They had pets, as the
Grom did, and homes and children, and a culture. The inhabitants were
skilled mechanically, as were the Grom.

But there were terrific differences, also. The Men were of fixed and
immutable form, like stones or trees. And to compensate, their planet
boasted a fantastic array of species, types and kinds. This was
completely unlike Grom, which had only eight distinct forms of animal
life.

And evidently, the Men were skilled at detecting invaders, Pid
thought. He wished he knew how the other expeditions had failed. It
would make his job much easier.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Man lurched past them on two incredibly stiff legs. Rigidity was
evident in his every move. Without looking, he hurried past.

"I know," Ger said, after the creature had moved away. "I'll disguise
myself as a Man, walk through the gate to the reactor room, and
activate my Displacer."

"You can't speak their language," Pid pointed out.

"I won't speak at all. I'll ignore them. Look." Quickly Ger shaped
himself into a Man.

"That's not bad," Pid said.

Ger tried a few practice steps, copying the bumpy walk of the Man.

"But I'm afraid it won't work," Pid said.

"It's perfectly logical," Ger pointed out.

"I know. Therefore the other expeditions must have tried it. And none
of them came back."

There was no arguing that. Ger flowed back into the shape of a log.
"What, then?" he asked.

"Let me think," Pid said.

Another creature lurched past, on four legs instead of two. Pid
recognized it as a Dog, a pet of Man. He watched it carefully.

The Dog ambled to the gate, head down, in no particular hurry. It
walked through, unchallenged, and lay down in the grass.

"H'm," Pid said.

They watched. One of the Men walked past, and touched the Dog on the
head. The Dog stuck out its tongue and rolled over on its side.

"I can do that," Ger said excitedly. He started to flow into the shape
of a Dog.

"No, wait," Pid said. "We'll spend the rest of the day thinking it
over. This is too important to rush into."

Ger subsided sulkily.

"Come on, let's move back," Pid said. He and Ger started into the
woods. Then he remembered Ilg.

"Ilg?" he called softly.

There was no answer.

"Ilg!"

"What? Oh, yes," an oak tree said, and melted into a bush. "Sorry.
What were you saying?"

"We're moving back," Pid said. "Were you, by any chance, Thinking?"

"Oh, no," Ilg assured him. "Just resting."

Pid let it go at that. There was too much else to worry about.

       *       *       *       *       *

They discussed it for the rest of the day, hidden in the deepest part
of the woods. The only alternatives seemed to be Man or Dog. A Tree
couldn't walk past the gates, since that was not in the nature of
trees. Nor could anything else, and escape notice.

Going as a Man seemed too risky. They decided that Ger would sally out
in the morning as a Dog.

"Now get some sleep," Pid said.

Obediently his two crewmen flattened out, going immediately Shapeless.
But Pid had a more difficult time.

Everything looked too easy. Why wasn't the atomic installation better
guarded? Certainly the Men must have learned something from the
expeditions they had captured in the past. Or had they killed them
without asking any questions?

You couldn't tell what an alien would do.

Was that open gate a trap?

Wearily he flowed into a comfortable position on the lumpy ground.
Then he pulled himself together hastily.

He had gone Shapeless!

Comfort was not in the line of duty, he reminded himself, and firmly
took a Pilot's Shape.

But a Pilot's Shape wasn't constructed for sleeping on damp, bumpy
ground. Pid spent a restless night, thinking of ships, and wishing he
were flying one.

He awoke in the morning tired and ill-tempered. He nudged Ger.

"Let's get this over with," he said.

Ger flowed gaily to his feet.

"Come on, Ilg," Pid said angrily, looking around. "Wake up."

There was no reply.

"Ilg!" he called.

Still there was no reply.

"Help me look for him," Pid said to Ger. "He must be around here
somewhere."

Together they tested every bush, tree, log and shrub in the vicinity.
But none of them was Ilg.

Pid began to feel a cold panic run through him. What could have
happened to the Radioman?

"Perhaps he decided to go through the gate on his own," Ger suggested.
[original: Ilg suggested (n. of transcriber)]

Pid considered the possibility. It seemed unlikely. Ilg had never
shown much initiative. He had always been content to follow orders.

They waited. But midday came, and there was still no sign of Ilg.

"We can't wait any longer," Pid said, and they started through the
woods. Pid wondered if Ilg _had_ tried to get through the gates on his
own. Those quiet types often concealed a foolhardy streak.

But there was nothing to show that Ilg had been successful. He would
have to assume that the Radioman was dead, or captured by the Men.

That left two of them to activate a Displacer.

And he still didn't know what had happened to the other expeditions.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the edge of the woods, Ger turned himself into a facsimile of a
Dog. Pid inspected him carefully.

"A little less tail," he said.

Ger shortened his tail.

"More ears."

Ger lengthened his ears,

"Now even them up."

They became even.

Pid inspected the finished product. As far as he could tell, Ger was
perfect, from the tip of his tail to his wet, black nose.

"Good luck," Pid said.

"Thanks." Cautiously Ger moved out of the woods, walking in the
lurching style of Dogs and Men. At the gate the guard called to him.
Pid held his breath.

Ger walked past the Man, ignoring him. The Man started to walk over.
Ger broke into a run.

Pid shaped a pair of strong legs for himself, ready to dash if Ger was
caught.

But the guard turned back to his gate. Ger stopped running
immediately, and strolled quietly toward the main door of the
building.

Pid dissolved his legs with a sigh of relief ... and then tensed
again.

The main door was closed!

Pid hoped the Radioman wouldn't try to open it. That was _not_ in the
nature of Dogs.

As he watched, another Dog came running toward Ger. Ger backed away
from him. The Dog approached and sniffed. Ger sniffed back.

Then both of them ran around the building.

That was clever, Pid thought. There was bound to be a door in the
rear.

He glanced up at the afternoon sun. As soon as the Displacer was
activated, the Grom armies would begin to pour through. By the time
the Men recovered from the shock, a million or more Grom troops would
be here, weapons and all. With more following.

The day passed slowly, and nothing happened.

Nervously Pid watched the front of the plant. It shouldn't be taking
so long, if Ger were successful.

Late into the night he waited. Men walked in and out of the
installation, and Dogs barked around the gates. But Ger did not
appear.

Ger had failed. Ilg was gone. Only he was left.

And _still_ he didn't know what had happened.

       *       *       *       *       *

By morning, Pid was in complete despair. He knew that the twenty-first
Grom expedition to this planet was near the point of complete failure.
Now it was all up to him.

He saw that workers were arriving in great number, rushing through the
gates. He decided to take advantage of the apparent confusion, and
started to shape himself into a Man.

A Dog walked past the woods where he was hiding.

"Hello," the Dog said.

It was Ger!

"What happened?" Pid asked, with a sigh of relief. "Why were you so
long? Couldn't you get in?"

"I don't know," Ger said, wagging his tail. "I didn't try."

Pid was speechless.

"I went hunting," Ger said complacently. "This form is ideal for
Hunting, you know. I went out the rear gate with another Dog."

"But the expedition--your duty--"

"I changed my mind," Ger told him. "You know, Pilot, I never wanted to
be a Detector."

"But you were _born_ a Detector!"

"That's true," Ger said. "But it doesn't help. I always wanted to be a
Hunter."

Pid shook his entire body in annoyance. "You can't," he said, very
slowly, as one would explain to a Gromling. "The Hunter shape is
forbidden to you."

"Not here it isn't," Ger said, still wagging his tail.

"Let's have no more of this," Pid said angrily. "Get into that
installation and set up your Displacer. I'll try to overlook this
heresy."

"No," Ger said. "I don't want the Grom here. They'd ruin it for the
rest of us."

"He's right," a nearby oak tree said.

"Ilg!" Pid gasped. "Where are you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Branches stirred. "I'm right here," Ilg said. "I've been Thinking."

"But--your caste--"

"Pilot," Ger said sadly, "why don't you wake up? Most of the people on
Grom are miserable. Only custom makes us take the caste-shape of our
ancestors."

"Pilot," Ilg said, "all Grom are born Shapeless!"

"And being born Shapeless, all Grom should have Freedom of Shape,"
Ger said.

"Exactly," Ilg said. "But he'll never understand. Now excuse me. I
want to Think." And the oak tree was silent.

Pid laughed humorlessly. "The Men will kill you off," he said. "Just
as they killed off all the other expeditions."

"No one from Grom has been killed," Ger told him. "The other
expeditions are right here."

"Alive?"

"Certainly. The Men don't even know we exist. That Dog I was Hunting
with is a Grom from the twelfth expedition. There are hundreds of us
here, Pilot. We like it."

Pid tried to absorb it all. He had always known that the lower castes
were lax in caste-consciousness. But this was preposterous!

This planet's secret menace was--freedom!

"Join us, Pilot," Ger said. "We've got a paradise here. Do you know
how many species there are on this planet? An uncountable number!
There's a shape to suit every need!"

Pid ignored them. Traitors!

He'd do the job all by himself.

So Men were unaware of the presence of the Grom. Getting near the
reactor might not be so difficult after all. The others had failed in
their duty because they were of the lower castes, weak and
irresponsible. Even the Pilots among them must have been secretly
sympathetic to the Cult of Shapelessness the Chief had mentioned, or
the alien planet could never have swayed them.

What shape to assume for his attempt?

Pid considered.

A Dog might be best. Evidently Dogs could wander pretty much where
they wished. If something went wrong, Pid could change his shape to
meet the occasion.

"The Supreme Council will take care of all of you," he snarled, and
shaped himself into a small brown Dog. "I'm going to set up the
Displacer myself."

He studied himself for a moment, bared his teeth at Ger, and loped
toward the gate.

       *       *       *       *       *

He loped for about ten feet and stopped in utter horror.

The smells rushed at him from all directions. Smells in a profusion
and variety he had never dreamed existed. Smells that were harsh,
sweet, sharp, heavy, mysterious, overpowering. Smells that terrified.
Alien and repulsive and inescapable, the odors of Earth struck him
like a blow.

He curled his lips and held his breath. He ran on for a few steps, and
had to breathe again. He almost choked.

He tried to remold his Dog-nostrils to be less sensitive. It didn't
work. It wouldn't, so long as he kept the Dog-shape. An attempt to
modify his metabolism didn't work either.

All this in the space of two or three seconds. He was rooted in his
tracks, fighting the smells, wondering what to do.

Then the noises hit him.

They were a constant and staggering roar, through which every tiniest
whisper of sound stood out clearly and distinct. Sounds upon
sounds--more noise than he had ever heard before at one time in his
life. The woods behind him had suddenly become a mad-house.

Utterly confused, he lost control and became Shapeless.

He half-ran, half-flowed into a nearby bush. There he re-Shaped,
obliterating the offending Dog ears and nostrils with vicious strokes
of his thoughts.

The Dog-shape was out. Absolutely. Such appalling sharpness of senses
might be fine for a Hunter such as Ger--he probably gloried in them.
But another moment of such impressions would have driven Pid the Pilot
mad.

What now? He lay in the bush and thought about it, while gradually his
mind threw off the last effects of the dizzying sensory assault.

He looked at the gate. The Men standing there evidently hadn't noticed
his fiasco. They were looking in another direction.

... a Man?

Well, it was worth a try.

       *       *       *       *       *

Studying the Men at the gate, Pid carefully shaped himself into a
facsimile--a synthesis, actually, embodying one characteristic of
that, another of this.

He emerged from the side of the bush opposite the gate, on his hands
and knees. He sniffed the air, noting that the smells the Man-nostrils
picked up weren't unpleasant at all. In fact, some of them were
decidedly otherwise. It had just been the acuity of the Dog-nostrils,
the number of smells they had detected and the near-brilliance with
which they had done so, that had shocked him.

Also, the sounds weren't half so devastating. Only relatively close
sounds stood out. All else was an undetailed whispering.

Evidently, Pid thought, it had been a long time since Men had been
Hunters.

He tested his legs, standing up and taking a few clumsy steps. _Thud_
of foot on ground. Drag the other leg forward in a heavy arc. _Thud._
Rocking from side to side, he marched back and forth behind the bush.
His arms flapped as he sought balance. His head wobbled on its neck,
until he remembered to hold it up. Head up, eyes down, he missed
seeing a small rock. His heel turned on it. He sat down, hard.

The ankle hurt. Pid curled his Man-lips and crawled back into the
bush.

The Man-shape was too unspeakably clumsy. It was offensive to plod one
step at a time. Body held rigidly upright. Arms wobbling. There had
been a deluge of sense-impressions in the Dog-shape; there was dull,
stiff, half-alive inadequacy to the Man-shape.

Besides, it was dangerous, now that Pid thought it over, as well as
distasteful. He couldn't control it properly. It wouldn't look right.
Someone might question him. There was too much about Men he
didn't--couldn't--know. The planting of the Displacer was too
important a thing for him to fumble again. Only luck had kept him from
being seen during the sensory onslaught.

The Displacer in his body pouch pulsed and tugged, urging him to be on
his way toward the distant reactor room.

Grimly, Pid let out the last breath he had taken with his Man-lungs,
and dissolved the lungs.

What shape to take?

Again he studied the gate, the Men standing beside it, the building
beyond in which was the all-important reactor.

A small shape was needed. A fast one. An unobtrusive one.

He lay and thought.

The bush rustled above him. A small brown shape had fluttered down to
light on a twig. It hopped to another twig, twittering. Then it
fluttered off in a flash, and was gone.

That, Pid thought, was it.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Sparrow that was not a Sparrow rose from the bush a few moments
later. An observer would have seen it circle the bush, diving,
hedgehopping, even looping, as if practicing all maneuvers possible to
Sparrows.

Pid tensed his shoulder muscles, inclined his wings. He slipped off to
the right, approached the bush at what seemed breakneck speed, though
he knew this was only because of his small size. At the last second he
lifted his tail. Not quite quickly enough. He swooped up and over the
top of the bush, but his legs brushed the top leaves, his beak went
down, and he stumbled in air for a few feet back-forward.

He blinked beady eyes as if at a challenge. Back toward the bush at a
fine clip, again up and over. This time cleanly.

He chose a tree. Zoomed into its network of branches, wove a web of
flight, working his way around and around the trunk, over and under
branches that flashed before him, through crotches with no more than a
feather's-breath to spare.

At last he rested on a low branch, and found himself chirping in
delight.

The tree extruded a feeler from the branch he sat on, and touched his
wings and tail.

"Interesting," said the tree. "I'll have to try that shape some time."

Ilg.

"Traitor," hissed Pid, growing a mouth in his chest to hiss it, and
then he did something that caused Ilg to exclaim in outrage.

Pid flew out of the woods. Over the underbrush and across the open
space toward the gate.

This body would do the trick!

This body would do anything!

He rose, in a matter of a few Sparrow heartbeats, to an altitude of a
hundred feet. From here the gate, the Men, the building were small,
sharp shapes against a green-brown mat. Pid found that he could see
not only with unaccustomed clarity, but with a range of vision that
astonished him. To right and to left he could see far into the hazy
blue of the sky, and the higher he rose the farther he could see.

He rose higher.

The Displacer pulsed, reminding him of the job he had to do.

       *       *       *       *       *

He stiffened his wings and glided, regretfully putting aside his
desires to experiment with this wonderful shape, at least for the
present. After he planted the Displacer, he would go off by himself
for a while and do it just a little more--somewhere where Ilg and Ger
would not see him--before the Grom Army arrived and the invasion
began.

He felt a tiny twinge of guilt, as he circled. It was Evil to want to
keep this alien flying shape any longer than was absolutely necessary
to the performance of his duty. It was a device of the Shapeless One--

But what had Ilg said? _All Grom are born Shapeless._ It was true.
Grom children were amorphous, until old enough to be instructed in the
caste-shape of their ancestors.

Maybe it wasn't _too_ great a sin to alter your Shape, then--just once
in a long while. After all, one must be fully aware of the nature of
Evil in order to meaningfully reject it.

He had fallen lower in circling. The Displacer pulse had strengthened.
For some reason it irritated him. He drove higher on strong wings,
circled again. Air rushed past him--a smooth, whispering flow, pierced
by his beak, streaming invisibly past his sharp eyes, moving along his
body in tiny turbulences that moved his feathers against his skin.

It occurred to him--or rather struck him with considerable force--that
he was satisfying a longing of his Pilot Caste that went far deeper
than Piloting.

He drove powerfully with his wings, felt tonus across his back, shot
forward and up. He thought of the controls of his ship. He imagined
flowing into them, becoming part of them, as he had so often done--and
for the first time in his life the thought failed to excite him.

No machine could compare with this!

What he would give to have wings of his own!

_... Get from my sight, Shapeless One!_

The Displacer must be planted, activated. All Grom depended on him.

He eyed the building, far below. He would pass over it. The Displacer
would tell him which window to enter--which window was so near the
reactor that he could do his job before the Men even knew he was
about.

He started to drop lower, and the Hawk struck.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been above him. His first inkling of danger was the sharp pain
of talons in his back, and the stunning blow of a beak across his
head.

Dazed, he let his back go Shapeless. His body-substance flowed from
the grasp of the talons. He dropped a dozen feet and resumed
Sparrow-shape, hearing an astonished squawk from the attacker.

He banked, and looked up. The Hawk was eyeing him.

Talons spread again. The sharp beak gaped. The Hawk swooped.

Pid had to fight as a Bird, naturally. He was four hundred feet above
the ground.

So he became an impossibly deadly Bird.

He grew to twice the size of the Hawk. He grew a foot-long beak with
a double razor's edge. He grew talons like six inch scimitars. His
eyes gleamed a red challenge.

The Hawk broke flight, squalling in alarm. Frantically, tail down and
widespread, it thundered its wings and came to a dead stop six feet
from Pid.

Looking thoughtfully at Pid, it allowed itself to plummet. It fell a
hundred feet, spread its wings, stretched its neck and flew off so
hastily that its wings became blurs.

Pid saw no reason to pursue it.

Then, after a moment, he did.

He glided, keeping the Hawk in sight, thoughts racing, feeling the
newness, the power, the wonder of Freedom of Shape.

Freedom....

He did not want to give it up.

The bird-shape was wondrous. He would experiment with it. Later, he
might tire of it for a time and assume another--a crawling or running
shape, or even a swimming one. The possibilities for excitement, for
adventure, for fulfilment and simple sensual pleasure were endless!

Freedom of Shape was--obviously, now that you thought on it--the Grom
birthright. And the caste-system was artificial--obviously. A device
for political and priestly benefit--obviously.

_Go away, Shapeless One ... this does not concern you._

He rose to a thousand feet, two thousand, three. The Displacer's pulse
grew feebler and finally vanished.

At four thousand feet he released it and watched it spin downward,
vanish into a cloud.

Then he set out after the Hawk, which was now only a dot on the
horizon. He would find out how the Hawk had broken flight as it
had--skidded on air--he wanted to do that too! There were so many
things he wanted to learn about flying. In a week, he thought, he
should be able to duplicate all the skill that millennia had evolved
into Birds. Then his new life would really begin.

He became a torpedo-shape with huge wings, and sped after the Hawk.

                                                         ROBERT SHECKLEY

       *       *       *       *       *[Illustration: Illustrated by CONNELL]


 the
    Leech

 By PHILLIPS BARBEE


 _A visitor should be fed, but
 this one could eat you out of
 house and home ... literally!_


The leech was waiting for food. For millennia it had been drifting
across the vast emptiness of space. Without consciousness, it had spent
the countless centuries in the void between the stars. It was unaware
when it finally reached a sun. Life-giving radiation flared around the
hard, dry spore. Gravitation tugged at it.

A planet claimed it, with other stellar debris, and the leech fell,
still dead-seeming within its tough spore case.

One speck of dust among many, the winds blew it around the Earth, played
with it, and let it fall.

On the ground, it began to stir. Nourishment soaked in, permeating the
spore case. It grew--and fed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Frank Conners came up on the porch and coughed twice. "Say, pardon me,
Professor," he said.

The long, pale man didn't stir from the sagging couch. His horn-rimmed
glasses were perched on his forehead, and he was snoring very gently.

"I'm awful sorry to disturb you," Conners said, pushing back his
battered felt hat. "I know it's your restin' week and all, but there's
something damned funny in the ditch."

The pale man's left eyebrow twitched, but he showed no other sign of
having heard.

Frank Conners coughed again, holding his spade in one purple-veined
hand. "Didja hear me, Professor?"

"Of course I heard you," Micheals said in a muffled voice, his eyes
still closed. "You found a pixie."

"A what?" Conners asked, squinting at Micheals.

"A little man in a green suit. Feed him milk, Conners."

"No, sir. I think it's a rock."

Micheals opened one eye and focused it in Conners' general direction.

"I'm awfully sorry about it," Conners said. Professor Micheals' resting
week was a ten-year-old custom, and his only eccentricity. All winter
Micheals taught anthropology, worked on half a dozen committees, dabbled
in physics and chemistry, and still found time to write a book a year.
When summer came, he was tired.

Arriving at his worked-out New York State farm, it was his invariable
rule to do absolutely nothing for a week. He hired Frank Conners to cook
for that week and generally make himself useful, while Professor
Micheals slept.

During the second week, Micheals would wander around, look at the trees
and fish. By the third week he would be getting a tan, reading,
repairing the sheds and climbing mountains. At the end of four weeks, he
could hardly wait to get back to the city.

But the resting week was sacred.

"I really wouldn't bother you for anything small," Conners said
apologetically. "But that damned rock melted two inches off my spade."

Micheals opened both eyes and sat up. Conners held out the spade. The
rounded end was sheared cleanly off. Micheals swung himself off the
couch and slipped his feet into battered moccasins.

"Let's see this wonder," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The object was lying in the ditch at the end of the front lawn, three
feet from the main road. It was round, about the size of a truck tire,
and solid throughout. It was about an inch thick, as far as he could
tell, grayish black and intricately veined.

"Don't touch it," Conners warned.

"I'm not going to. Let me have your spade." Micheals took the spade and
prodded the object experimentally. It was completely unyielding. He held
the spade to the surface for a moment, then withdrew it. Another inch
was gone.

Micheals frowned, and pushed his glasses tighter against his nose. He
held the spade against the rock with one hand, the other held close to
the surface. More of the spade disappeared.

"Doesn't seem to be generating heat," he said to Conners. "Did you
notice any the first time?"

Conners shook his head.

Micheals picked up a clod of dirt and tossed it on the object. The dirt
dissolved quickly, leaving no trace on the gray-black surface. A large
stone followed the dirt, and disappeared in the same way.

"Isn't that just about the damnedest thing you ever saw, Professor?"
Conners asked.

"Yes," Micheals agreed, standing up again. "It just about is."

He hefted the spade and brought it down smartly on the object. When it
hit, he almost dropped the spade. He had been gripping the handle
rigidly, braced for a recoil. But the spade struck that unyielding
surface and _stayed_. There was no perceptible give, but absolutely no
recoil.

"Whatcha think it is?" Conners asked.

"It's no stone," Micheals said. He stepped back. "A leech drinks blood.
This thing seems to be drinking dirt. And spades." He struck it a few
more times, experimentally. The two men looked at each other. On the
road, half a dozen Army trucks rolled past.

"I'm going to phone the college and ask a physics man about it,"
Micheals said. "Or a biologist. I'd like to get rid of that thing before
it spoils my lawn."

They walked back to the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

Everything fed the leech. The wind added its modicum of kinetic energy,
ruffling across the gray-black surface. Rain fell, and the force of each
individual drop added to its store. The water was sucked in by the
all-absorbing surface.

The sunlight above it was absorbed, and converted into mass for its
body. Beneath it, the soil was consumed, dirt, stones and branches
broken down by the leech's complex cells and changed into energy. Energy
was converted back into mass, and the leech grew.

Slowly, the first flickers of consciousness began to return. Its first
realization was of the impossible smallness of its body.

It grew.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Micheals looked the next day, the leech was eight feet across,
sticking out into the road and up the side of the lawn. The following
day it was almost eighteen feet in diameter, shaped to fit the contour
of the ditch, and covering most of the road. That day the sheriff drove
up in his model A, followed by half the town.

"Is that your leech thing, Professor Micheals?" Sheriff Flynn asked.

"That's it," Micheals said. He had spent the past days looking
unsuccessfully for an acid that would dissolve the leech.

"We gotta get it out of the road," Flynn said, walking truculently up to
the leech. "Something like this, you can't let it block the road,
Professor. The Army's gotta use this road."

"I'm terribly sorry," Micheals said with a straight face. "Go right
ahead, Sheriff. But be careful. It's hot." The leech wasn't hot, but it
seemed the simplest explanation under the circumstances.

Micheals watched with interest as the sheriff tried to shove a crowbar
under it. He smiled to himself when it was removed with half a foot of
its length gone.

The sheriff wasn't so easily discouraged. He had come prepared for a
stubborn piece of rock. He went to the rumble seat of his car and took
out a blowtorch and a sledgehammer, ignited the torch and focused it on
one edge of the leech.

After five minutes, there was no change. The gray didn't turn red or
even seem to heat up. Sheriff Flynn continued to bake it for fifteen
minutes, then called to one of the men.

"Hit that spot with the sledge, Jerry."

Jerry picked up the sledgehammer, motioned the sheriff back, and swung
it over his head. He let out a howl as the hammer struck unyieldingly.
There wasn't a fraction of recoil.

In the distance they heard the roar of an Army convoy.

"Now we'll get some action," Flynn said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Micheals wasn't so sure. He walked around the periphery of the leech,
asking himself what kind of substance would react that way. The answer
was easy--no substance. No _known_ substance.

The driver in the lead jeep held up his hand, and the long convoy ground
to a halt. A hard, efficient-looking officer stepped out of the jeep.
From the star on either shoulder, Micheals knew he was a brigadier
general.

"You can't block this road," the general said. He was a tall, spare man
in suntans, with a sunburned face and cold eyes. "Please clear that
thing away."

"We can't move it," Micheals said. He told the general what had happened
in the past few days.

"It must be moved," the general said. "This convoy must go through." He
walked closer and looked at the leech. "You say it can't be jacked up by
a crowbar? A torch won't burn it?"

"That's right," Micheals said, smiling faintly.

"Driver," the general said over his shoulder. "Ride over it."

Micheals started to protest, but stopped himself. The military mind
would have to find out in its own way.

The driver put his jeep in gear and shot forward, jumping the leech's
four-inch edge. The jeep got to the center of the leech and stopped.

"I didn't tell you to stop!" the general bellowed.

"I didn't, sir!" the driver protested.

The jeep had been yanked to a stop and had stalled. The driver started
it again, shifted to four-wheel drive, and tried to ram forward. The
jeep was fixed immovably, as though set in concrete.

"Pardon me," Micheals said. "If you look, you can see that the tires are
melting down."

The general stared, his hand creeping automatically toward his pistol
belt. Then he shouted, "Jump, driver! Don't touch that gray stuff."

White-faced, the driver climbed to the hood of his jeep, looked around
him, and jumped clear.

There was complete silence as everyone watched the jeep. First its tires
melted down, and then the rims. The body, resting on the gray surface,
melted, too.

The aerial was the last to go.

The general began to swear softly under his breath. He turned to the
driver. "Go back and have some men bring up hand grenades and dynamite."

The driver ran back to the convoy.

"I don't know what you've got here," the general said. "But it's not
going to stop a U.S. Army convoy."

Micheals wasn't so sure.

       *       *       *       *       *

The leech was nearly awake now, and its body was calling for more and
more food. It dissolved the soil under it at a furious rate, filling it
in with its own body, flowing outward.

A large object landed on it, and that became food also. Then suddenly--

A burst of energy against its surface, and then another, and another. It
consumed them gratefully, converting them into mass. Little metal
pellets struck it, and their kinetic energy was absorbed, their mass
converted. More explosions took place, helping to fill the starving
cells.

It began to sense things--controlled combustion around it, vibrations of
wind, mass movements.

There was another, greater explosion, a taste of _real_ food! Greedily
it ate, growing faster. It waited anxiously for more explosions, while
its cells screamed for food.

But no more came. It continued to feed on the soil and on the Sun's
energy. Night came, noticeable for its lesser energy possibilities, and
then more days and nights. Vibrating objects continued to move around
it.

It ate and grew and flowed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Micheals stood on a little hill, watching the dissolution of his house.
The leech was several hundred yards across now, lapping at his front
porch.

Good-by, home, Micheals thought, remembering the ten summers he had
spent there.

The porch collapsed into the body of the leech. Bit by bit, the house
crumpled.

The leech looked like a field of lava now, a blasted spot on the green
Earth.

"Pardon me, sir," a soldier said, coming up behind him. "General
O'Donnell would like to see you."

"Right," Micheals said, and took his last look at the house.

He followed the soldier through the barbed wire that had been set up in
a half-mile circle around the leech. A company of soldiers was on guard
around it, keeping back the reporters and the hundreds of curious people
who had flocked to the scene. Micheals wondered why he was still allowed
inside. Probably, he decided, because most of this was taking place on
his land.

The soldier brought him to a tent. Micheals stooped and went in.
General O'Donnell, still in suntans, was seated at a small desk. He
motioned Micheals to a chair.

"I've been put in charge of getting rid of this leech," he said to
Micheals.

Micheals nodded, not commenting on the advisability of giving a soldier
a scientist's job.

"You're a professor, aren't you?"

"Yes. Anthropology."

"Good. Smoke?" The general lighted Micheals' cigarette. "I'd like you to
stay around here in an advisory capacity. You were one of the first to
see this leech. I'd appreciate your observations on--" he smiled--"the
enemy."

"I'd be glad to," Micheals said. "However, I think this is more in the
line of a physicist or a biochemist."

"I don't want this place cluttered with scientists," General O'Donnell
said, frowning at the tip of his cigarette. "Don't get me wrong. I have
the greatest appreciation for science. I am, if I do say so, a
scientific soldier. I'm always interested in the latest weapons. You
can't fight any kind of a war any more without science."

       *       *       *       *       *

O'Donnell's sunburned face grew firm. "But I can't have a team of
longhairs poking around this thing for the next month, holding me up. My
job is to destroy it, by any means in my power, and at once. I am going
to do just that."

"I don't think you'll find it that easy," Micheals said.

"That's what I want you for," O'Donnell said. "Tell me why and I'll
figure out a way of doing it."

"Well, as far as I can figure out, the leech is an organic mass-energy
converter, and a frighteningly efficient one. I would guess that it has
a double cycle. First, it converts mass into energy, then back into mass
for its body. Second, energy is converted directly into the body mass.
How this takes place, I do not know. The leech is not protoplasmic. It
may not even be cellular--"

"So we need something big against it," O'Donnell interrupted. "Well,
that's all right. I've got some big stuff here."

"I don't think you understand me," Micheals said. "Perhaps I'm not
phrasing this very well. _The leech eats energy._ It can consume the
strength of any energy weapon you use against it."

"What happens," O'Donnell asked, "if it keeps on eating?"

"I have no idea what its growth-limits are," Micheals said. "Its growth
may be limited only by its food source."

"You mean it could continue to grow probably forever?"

"It could possibly grow as long as it had something to feed on."

"This is really a challenge," O'Donnell said. "That leech can't be
totally impervious to force."

"It seems to be. I suggest you get some physicists in here. Some
biologists also. Have them figure out a way of nullifying it."

The general put out his cigarette. "Professor, I cannot wait while
scientists wrangle. There is an axiom of mine which I am going to tell
you." He paused impressively. "Nothing is impervious to force. Muster
enough force and anything will give. _Anything._

"Professor," the general continued, in a friendlier tone, "you shouldn't
sell short the science you represent. We have, massed under North Hill,
the greatest accumulation of energy and radioactive weapons ever
assembled in one spot. Do you think your leech can stand the full force
of them?"

"I suppose it's possible to overload the thing," Micheals said
doubtfully. He realized now why the general wanted him around. He
supplied the trappings of science, without the authority to override
O'Donnell.

"Come with me," General O'Donnell said cheerfully, getting up and
holding back a flap of the tent. "We're going to crack that leech in
half."

       *       *       *       *       *

After a long wait, rich food started to come again, piped into one side
of it. First there was only a little, and then more and more.
Radiations, vibrations, explosions, solids, liquids--an amazing variety
of edibles. It accepted them all. But the food was coming too slowly for
the starving cells, for new cells were constantly adding their demands
to the rest.

The ever-hungry body screamed for more food, faster!

Now that it had reached a fairly efficient size, it was fully awake. It
puzzled over the energy-impressions around it, locating the source of
the new food massed in one spot.

Effortlessly it pushed itself into the air, flew a little way and
dropped on the food. Its super-efficient cells eagerly gulped the rich
radioactive substances. But it did not ignore the lesser potentials of
metal and clumps of carbohydrates.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The damned fools," General O'Donnell said. "Why did they have to panic?
You'd think they'd never been trained." He paced the ground outside his
tent, now in a new location three miles back.

The leech had grown to two miles in diameter. Three farming communities
had been evacuated.

Micheals, standing beside the general, was still stupefied by the
memory. The leech had accepted the massed power of the weapons for a
while, and then its entire bulk had lifted in the air. The Sun had been
blotted out as it flew leisurely over North Hill, and dropped. There
should have been time for evacuation, but the frightened soldiers had
been blind with fear.

Sixty-seven men were lost in Operation Leech, and General O'Donnell
asked permission to use atomic bombs. Washington sent a group of
scientists to investigate the situation.

"Haven't those experts decided yet?" O'Donnell asked, halting angrily in
front of the tent. "They've been talking long enough."

"It's a hard decision," Micheals said. Since he wasn't an official
member of the investigating team, he had given his information and left.
"The physicists consider it a biological matter, and the biologists seem
to think the chemists should have the answer. No one's an expert on
this, because it's never happened before. We just don't have the data."

"It's a military problem," O'Donnell said harshly. "I'm not interested
in what the thing is--I want to know what can destroy it. They'd better
give me permission to use the bomb."

Micheals had made his own calculations on that. It was impossible to say
for sure, but taking a flying guess at the leech's mass-energy
absorption rate, figuring in its size and apparent capacity for growth,
an atomic bomb _might_ overload it--if used soon enough.

He estimated three days as the limit of usefulness. The leech was
growing at a geometric rate. It could cover the United States in a few
months.

"For a week I've been asking permission to use the bomb," O'Donnell
grumbled. "And I'll get it, but not until after those jackasses end
their damned talking." He stopped pacing and turned to Micheals. "I am
going to destroy the leech. I am going to smash it, if that's the last
thing I do. It's more than a matter of security now. It's personal
pride."

That attitude might make great generals, Micheals thought, but it wasn't
the way to consider this problem. It was anthropomorphic of O'Donnell to
see the leech as an enemy. Even the identification, "leech," was a
humanizing factor. O'Donnell was dealing with it as he would any
physical obstacle, as though the leech were the simple equivalent of a
large army.

But the leech was not human, not even of this planet, perhaps. It should
be dealt with in its own terms.

"Here come the bright boys now," O'Donnell said.

       *       *       *       *       *

From a nearby tent a group of weary men emerged, led by Allenson, a
government biologist.

"Well," the general asked, "have you figured out what it is?"

"Just a minute, I'll hack off a sample," Allenson said, glaring through
red-rimmed eyes.

"Have you figured out some _scientific_ way of killing it?"

"Oh, that wasn't too difficult," Moriarty, an atomic physicist, said
wryly. "Wrap it in a perfect vacuum. That'll do the trick. Or blow it
off the Earth with anti-gravity."

"But failing that," Allenson said, "we suggest you use your atomic
bombs, and use them fast."

"Is that the opinion of your entire group?" O'Donnell asked, his eyes
glittering.

"Yes."

The general hurried away. Micheals joined the scientists.

"He should have called us in at the very first," Allenson complained.
"There's no time to consider anything but force now."

"Have you come to any conclusions about the nature of the leech?"
Micheals asked.

"Only general ones," Moriarty said, "and they're about the same as
yours. The leech is probably extraterrestrial in origin. It seems to
have been in a spore-stage until it landed on Earth." He paused to light
a pipe. "Incidentally, we should be damned glad it didn't drop in an
ocean. We'd have had the Earth eaten out from under us before we knew
what we were looking for."

They walked in silence for a few minutes.

"As you mentioned, it's a perfect converter--it can transform mass into
energy, and any energy into mass." Moriarty grinned. "Naturally that's
impossible and I have figures to prove it."

"I'm going to get a drink," Allenson said. "Anyone coming?"

"Best idea of the week," Micheals said. "I wonder how long it'll take
O'Donnell to get permission to use the bomb."

"If I know politics," Moriarty said, "too long."

       *       *       *       *       *

The findings of the government scientists were checked by other
government scientists. That took a few days. Then Washington wanted to
know if there wasn't some alternative to exploding an atomic bomb in the
middle of New York State. It took a little time to convince them of the
necessity. After that, people had to be evacuated, which took more time.

Then orders were made out, and five atomic bombs were checked out of a
cache. A patrol rocket was assigned, given orders, and put under
General O'Donnell's command. This took a day more.

Finally, the stubby scout rocket was winging its way over New York. From
the air, the grayish-black spot was easy to find. Like a festered wound,
it stretched between Lake Placid and Elizabethtown, covering Keene and
Keene Valley, and lapping at the edges of Jay.

The first bomb was released.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been a long wait after the first rich food. The greater radiation
of day was followed by the lesser energy of night many times, as the
leech ate away the earth beneath it, absorbed the air around it, and
grew. Then one day--

An amazing burst of energy!

Everything was food for the leech, but there was always the possibility
of choking. The energy poured over it, drenched it, battered it, and the
leech grew frantically, trying to contain the titanic dose. Still small,
it quickly reached its overload limit. The strained cells, filled to
satiation, were given more and more food. The strangling body built new
cells at lightning speed. And--

It held. The energy was controlled, stimulating further growth. More
cells took over the load, sucking in the food.

The next doses were wonderfully palatable, easily handled. The leech
overflowed its bounds, growing, eating, and growing.

That was a taste of real food! The leech was as near ecstasy as it had
ever been. It waited hopefully for more, but no more came.

It went back to feeding on the Earth. The energy, used to produce more
cells, was soon dissipated. Soon it was hungry again.

It would always be hungry.

       *       *       *       *       *

O'Donnell retreated with his demoralized men. They camped ten miles from
the leech's southern edge, in the evacuated town of Schroon Lake. The
leech was over sixty miles in diameter now and still growing fast. It
lay sprawled over the Adirondack Mountains, completely blanketing
everything from Saranac Lake to Port Henry, with one edge of it over
Westport, in Lake Champlain.

Everyone within two hundred miles of the leech was evacuated.

General O'Donnell was given permission to use hydrogen bombs, contingent
on the approval of his scientists.

"What have the bright boys decided?" O'Donnell wanted to know.

He and Micheals were in the living room of an evacuated Schroon Lake
house. O'Donnell had made it his new command post.

"Why are they hedging?" O'Donnell demanded impatiently. "The leech has
to be blown up quick. What are they fooling around for?"

"They're afraid of a chain reaction," Micheals told him. "A
concentration of hydrogen bombs might set one up in the Earth's crust or
in the atmosphere. It might do any of half a dozen things."

"Perhaps they'd like me to order a bayonet attack," O'Donnell said
contemptuously.

Micheals sighed and sat down in an armchair. He was convinced that the
whole method was wrong. The government scientists were being rushed into
a single line of inquiry. The pressure on them was so great that they
didn't have a chance to consider any other approach but force--and the
leech thrived on that.

Micheals was certain that there were times when fighting fire with fire
was not applicable.

Fire. Loki, god of fire. And of trickery. No, there was no answer there.
But Micheals' mind was in mythology now, retreating from the unbearable
present.

Allenson came in, followed by six other men.

"Well," Allenson said, "there's a damned good chance of splitting the
Earth wide open if you use the number of bombs our figures show you
need."

"You have to take chances in war," O'Donnell replied bluntly. "Shall I
go ahead?"

Micheals saw, suddenly, that O'Donnell didn't care if he did crack the
Earth. The red-faced general only knew that he was going to set off the
greatest explosion ever produced by the hand of Man.

"Not so fast," Allenson said. "I'll let the others speak for
themselves."

The general contained himself with difficulty. "Remember," he said,
"according to your own figures, the leech is growing at the rate of
twenty feet an hour."

"And speeding up," Allenson added. "But this isn't a decision to be made
in haste."

Micheals found his mind wandering again, to the lightning bolts of Zeus.
That was what they needed. Or the strength of Hercules.

Or--

He sat up suddenly. "Gentlemen, I believe I can offer you a possible
alternative, although it's a very dim one."

They stared at him.

"Have you ever heard of Antaeus?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

The more the leech ate, the faster it grew and the hungrier it became.
Although its birth was forgotten, it did remember a long way back. It
had eaten a planet in that ancient past. Grown tremendous, ravenous, it
had made the journey to a nearby star and eaten that, replenishing the
cells converted into energy for the trip. But then there was no more
food, and the next star was an enormous distance away.

It set out on the journey, but long before it reached the food, its
energy ran out. Mass, converted back to energy to make the trip, was
used up. It shrank.

Finally, all the energy was gone. It was a spore, drifting aimlessly,
lifelessly, in space.

That was the first time. Or was it? It thought it could remember back to
a distant, misty time when the Universe was evenly covered with stars.
It had eaten through them, cutting away whole sections, growing,
swelling. And the stars had swung off in terror, forming galaxies and
constellations.

Or was that a dream?

Methodically, it fed on the Earth, wondering where the rich food was.
And then it was back again, but this time above the leech.

It waited, but the tantalizing food remained out of reach. It was able
to sense how rich and pure the food was.

Why didn't it fall?

For a long time the leech waited, but the food stayed out of reach. At
last, it lifted and followed.

The food retreated, up, up from the surface of the planet. The leech
went after as quickly as its bulk would allow.

The rich food fled out, into space, and the leech followed. Beyond, it
could sense an even richer source.

The hot, wonderful food of a sun!

       *       *       *       *       *

O'Donnell served champagne for the scientists in the control room.
Official dinners would follow, but this was the victory celebration.

"A toast," the general said, standing. The men raised their glasses. The
only man not drinking was a lieutenant, sitting in front of the control
board that guided the drone spaceship.

"To Micheals, for thinking of--what was it again, Micheals?"

"Antaeus." Micheals had been drinking champagne steadily, but he didn't
feel elated. Antaeus, born of Ge, the Earth, and Poseidon, the Sea. The
invincible wrestler. Each time Hercules threw him to the ground, he
arose refreshed.

Until Hercules held him in the air.

Moriarty was muttering to himself, figuring with slide rule, pencil and
paper. Allenson was drinking, but he didn't look too happy about it.

"Come on, you birds of evil omen," O'Donnell said, pouring more
champagne. "Figure it out later. Right now, drink." He turned to the
operator. "How's it going?"

Micheals' analogy had been applied to a spaceship. The ship, operated by
remote control, was filled with pure radioactives. It hovered over the
leech until, rising to the bait, it had followed. Antaeus had left his
mother, the Earth, and was losing his strength in the air. The operator
was allowing the spaceship to run fast enough to keep out of the leech's
grasp, but close enough to keep it coming.

The spaceship and the leech were on a collision course with the Sun.

"Fine, sir," the operator said. "It's inside the orbit of Mercury now."

"Men," the general said, "I swore to destroy that thing. This isn't
exactly the way I wanted to do it. I figured on a more personal way. But
the important thing is the destruction. You will all witness it.
Destruction is at times a sacred mission. This is such a time. Men, I
feel wonderful."

"Turn the spaceship!" It was Moriarty who had spoken. His face was
white. "Turn the damned thing!"

He shoved his figures at them.

They were easy to read. The growth-rate of the leech. The
energy-consumption rate, estimated. Its speed in space, a constant. The
energy it would receive from the Sun as it approached, an exponential
curve. Its energy-absorption rate, figured in terms of growth, expressed
as a hyped-up discontinuous progression.

The result--

"It'll consume the Sun," Moriarty said, very quietly.

The control room turned into a bedlam. Six of them tried to explain it
to O'Donnell at the same time. Then Moriarty tried, and finally
Allenson.

"Its rate of growth is so great and its speed so slow--and it will get
so much energy--that the leech will be able to consume the Sun by the
time it gets there. Or, at least, to live off it until it can consume
it."

O'Donnell didn't bother to understand. He turned to the operator.

"Turn it," he said.

They all hovered over the radar screen, waiting.

       *       *       *       *       *

The food turned out of the leech's path and streaked away. Ahead was a
tremendous source, but still a long way off. The leech hesitated.

Its cells, recklessly expending energy, shouted for a decision. The food
slowed, tantalizingly near.

The closer source or the greater?

The leech's body wanted food _now_.

It started after it, away from the Sun.

The Sun would come next.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Pull it out at right angles to the plane of the Solar System," Allenson
said.

The operator touched the controls. On the radar screen, they saw a blob
pursuing a dot. It had turned.

Relief washed over them. It had been close!

"In what portion of the sky would the leech be?" O'Donnell asked, his
face expressionless.

"Come outside; I believe I can show you," an astronomer said. They
walked to the door. "Somewhere in that section," the astronomer said,
pointing.

"Fine. All right, Soldier," O'Donnell told the operator. "Carry out your
orders."

The scientists gasped in unison. The operator manipulated the controls
and the blob began to overtake the dot. Micheals started across the
room.

"Stop," the general said, and his strong, commanding voice stopped
Micheals. "I know what I'm doing. I had that ship especially built."

The blob overtook the dot on the radar screen.

"I told you this was a personal matter," O'Donnell said. "I swore to
destroy that leech. We can never have any security while it lives." He
smiled. "Shall we look at the sky?"

The general strolled to the door, followed by the scientists.

"Push the button, Soldier!"

The operator did. For a moment, nothing happened. Then the sky lit up!

A bright star hung in space. Its brilliance filled the night, grew, and
started to fade.

"What did you do?" Micheals gasped.

"That rocket was built around a hydrogen bomb," O'Donnell said, his
strong face triumphant. "I set it off at the contact moment." He called
to the operator again. "Is there anything showing on the radar?"

"Not a speck, sir."

"Men," the general said, "I have met the enemy and he is mine. Let's
have some more champagne."

But Micheals found that he was suddenly ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been shrinking from the expenditure of energy, when the great
explosion came. No thought of containing it. The leech's cells held for
the barest fraction of a second, and then spontaneously overloaded.

The leech was smashed, broken up, destroyed. It was split into a
thousand particles, and the particles were split a million times more.

The particles were thrown out on the wave front of the explosion, and
they split further, spontaneously.

Into spores.

The spores closed into dry, hard, seemingly lifeless specks of dust,
billions of them, scattered, drifting. Unconscious, they floated in the
emptiness of space.

Billions of them, waiting to be fed.

                                                     --PHILLIPS BARBEE




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ December 1952.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.Meeting of the Minds

                          By ROBERT SHECKLEY

                      Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Galaxy Magazine February 1960.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                What mission had the Quedak been given?
                Even he couldn't remember any more--but
               he refused to die till it was completed!


PART ONE

The Quedak lay on a small hilltop and watched a slender jet of light
descend through the sky. The feather-tailed jet was golden, and
brighter than the sun. Poised above it was a glistening metallic
object, fabricated rather than natural, hauntingly familiar. The Quedak
tried to think what it was.

He couldn't remember. His memories had atrophied with his functions,
leaving only scattered fragments of images. He searched among them now,
leafing through his brief scraps of ruined cities, dying populations, a
blue-water-filled canal, two moons, a spaceship....

That was it. The descending object was a _spaceship_. There had been
many of them during the great days of the Quedak.

Those great days were over, buried forever beneath the powdery sands.
Only the Quedak remained. He had life and he had a mission to perform.
The driving urgency of his mission remained, even after memory and
function had failed.

As the Quedak watched, the spaceship dipped lower. It wobbled and
sidejets kicked out to straighten it. With a gentle explosion of dust,
the spaceship settled tail first on the arid plain.

And the Quedak, driven by the imperative Quedak mission, dragged itself
painfully down from the little hilltop. Every movement was an agony. If
he were a selfish creature, the Quedak would have died. But he was not
selfish. Quedaks owed a duty to the universe; and that spaceship, after
all the blank years, was a link to other worlds, to planets where the
Quedak could live again and give his services to the native fauna.

He crawled, a centimeter at a time, and wondered whether he had the
strength to reach the alien spaceship before it left this dusty, dead
planet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Captain Jensen of the spaceship _Southern Cross_ was bored sick with
Mars. He and his men had been here for ten days. They had found no
important archeological specimens, no tantalizing hints of ancient
cities such as the _Polaris_ expedition had discovered at the South
Pole. Here there was nothing but sand, a few weary shrubs, and a
rolling hill or two. Their biggest find so far had been three pottery
shards.

Jensen readjusted his oxygen booster. Over the rise of a hill he saw
his two men returning.

"Anything interesting?" he asked.

"Just this," said engineer Vayne, holding up an inch of corroded blade
without a handle.

"Better than nothing," Jensen said. "How about you, Wilks?"

The navigator shrugged his shoulders. "Just photographs of the
landscape."

"OK," Jensen said. "Dump everything into the sterilizer and let's get
going."

Wilks looked mournful. "Captain, one quick sweep to the north might
turn up something really--"

"Not a chance," Jensen said. "Fuel, food, water, everything was
calculated for a ten-day stay. That's three days longer than _Polaris_
had. We're taking off this evening."

The men nodded. They had no reason to complain. As the second to land
on Mars, they were sure of a small but respectable footnote in the
history books. They put their equipment through the sterilizer vent,
sealed it, and climbed the ladder to the lock. Once they were inside,
Vayne closed and dogged the hatch, and started to open the inside
pressure door.

"Hold it!" Jensen called out.

"What's the matter?"

"I thought I saw something on your boot," Jensen said. "Something like
a big bug."

Vayne quickly ran his hands down the sides of his boots. The two men
circled him, examining his clothing.

"Shut that inner door," the captain said. "Wilks, did you see anything?"

"Not a thing," the navigator said. "Are you sure, Cap? We haven't found
anything that looks like animal or insect life here. Only a few plants."

"I could have sworn I saw something," Jensen said. "Maybe I was
wrong.... Anyhow, we'll fumigate our clothes before we enter the ship
proper. No sense taking any chance of bringing back some kind of
Martian bug."

The men removed their clothing and boots and stuffed them into the
chute. They searched the bare steel room carefully.

"Nothing here," Jensen said at last. "OK, let's go inside."

Once inside the ship, they sealed off the lock and fumigated it. The
Quedak, who had crept inside earlier through the partially opened
pressure door, listened to the distant hiss of gas. After a while he
heard the jets begin to fire.

The Quedak retreated to the dark rear of the ship. He found a metal
shelf and attached himself to the underside of it near the wall. After
a while he felt the ship tremble.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Quedak clung to the shelf during the long, slow flight through
space. He had forgotten what spaceships were like, but now memory
revived briefly. He felt blazing heat and freezing cold. Adjusting to
the temperature changes drained his small store of vitality, and the
Quedak began to wonder if he was going to die.

He _refused_ to die. Not while there was still a possibility of
accomplishing the Quedak mission.

In time he felt the harsh pull of gravity, and felt the main jets
firing again. The ship was coming down to its planet.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a routine landing, Captain Jensen and his men were taken to Medic
Checkpoint, where they were thumped, probed and tested for any sign of
disease.

Their spaceship was lowered to a flatcar and taken past rows of
moonships and ICBMs to Decontamination Stage One. Here the sealed outer
hull was washed down with powerful cleansing sprays. By evening, the
ship was taken to Decontamination Stage Two.

A team of two inspectors equipped with bulky tanks and hoses undogged
the hatch and entered, shutting the hatch behind them.

They began at the bow, methodically spraying as they moved toward the
rear. Everything seemed in order; no animals or plants, no trace of
mold such as the first Luna expedition had brought back.

"Do you really think this is necessary?" the assistant inspector asked.
He had already requested a transfer to Flight Control.

"Sure it is," the senior inspector said. "Can't tell what these ships
might bring in."

"I suppose so," the assistant said. "Still, a Martian whoosis wouldn't
even be able to live on Earth. Would it?"

"How should I know?" the senior inspector said. "I'm no botanist. Maybe
they don't know, either."

"Seems like a waste of--hey!"

"What is it?" the senior inspector asked.

"I thought I saw something," the assistant said. "Looked a little like
a palmetto bug. Over by that shelf."

The senior inspector adjusted his respirator more snugly over his face
and motioned to his assistant to do the same. He advanced slowly toward
the shelf, unfastening a second nozzle from the pressure tank on his
back. He turned it on, and a cloud of greenish gas sprayed out.

"There," the senior inspector said. "That should take care of your
bug." He knelt down and looked under the shelf. "Nothing here."

"It was probably a shadow," the assistant said.

Together they sprayed the entire interior of the ship, paying
particular attention to the small box of Martian artifacts. They left
the gas-filled ship and dogged the hatch again.

"Now what?" the assistant asked.

"Now we leave the ship sealed for three days," the senior inspector
said. "Then we inspect again. You find me the animal that'll live
through that."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Quedak, who had been clinging to the underside of the assistant's
shoe between the heel and the sole, released his hold. He watched the
shadowy biped figures move away, talking in their deep, rumbling,
indecipherable voices. He felt tired and unutterably lonely.

But buoying him up was the thought of the Quedak mission. Only that
was important. The first part of the mission was accomplished. He had
landed safely on an inhabited planet. Now he needed food and drink.
Then he had to have rest, a great deal of rest to restore his dormant
faculties. After that he would be ready to give this world what it so
obviously needed--the cooperation possible only through the Quedak mind.

He crept slowly down the shadowy yard, past the deserted hulls of
spaceships. He came to a wire fence and sensed the high-voltage
electricity running through it. Gauging his distance carefully, the
Quedak jumped safely through one of the openings in the mesh.

This was a very different section. From here the Quedak could smell
water and food. He moved hastily forward, then stopped.

He sensed the presence of a man. And something else. Something much
more menacing.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Who's there?" the watchman called out. He waited, his revolver in one
hand, his flashlight in the other. Thieves had broken into the yards
last week; they had stolen three cases of computer parts bound for Rio.
Tonight he was ready for them.

He walked forward, an old, keen-eyed man holding his revolver in a
rock-steady fist. The beam of his flashlight probed among the cargoes.
The yellow light flickered along a great pile of precision machine
tools for South Africa, past a water-extraction plant for Jordan and a
pile of mixed goods for Rabaul.

"You better come out," the watchman shouted. His flashlight probed at
sacks of rice for Shanghai and power saws for Burma. Then the beam of
light stopped abruptly.

"I'll be damned," the watchman said. Then he laughed. A huge and
red-eyed rat was glaring into the beam of his flashlight. It had
something in its jaws, something that looked like an unusually large
cockroach.

"Good eating," the watchman said. He holstered his revolver and
continued his patrol.

       *       *       *       *       *

A large black animal had seized the Quedak, and he felt heavy jaws
close over his back. He tried to fight; but, blinded by a sudden beam
of yellow light, he was betrayed by total and enervating confusion.

The yellow light went off. The black beast bit down hard on the
Quedak's armored back. The Quedak mustered his remaining strength, and,
uncoiling his long, scorpion-jointed tail, lashed out.

He missed, but the black beast released him hastily. They circled
each other, the Quedak hoisting his tail for a second blow, the beast
unwilling to turn loose this prey.

The Quedak waited for his chance. Elation filled him. This pugnacious
animal could be the first, the first on this planet to experience the
Quedak mission. From this humble creature a start could be made....

The beast sprang and its white teeth clicked together viciously.
The Quedak moved out of the way and its barb-headed tail flashed
out, fastening itself in the beast's back. The Quedak held on grimly
while the beast leaped and squirmed. Setting his feet, the Quedak
concentrated on the all-important task of pumping a tiny white crystal
down the length of his tail and under the beast's skin.

But this most important of the Quedak faculties was still dormant.
Unable to accomplish anything, the Quedak released his barbs, and,
taking careful aim, accurately drove his sting home between the black
beast's eyes. The blow, as the Quedak had known, was lethal.

The Quedak took nourishment from the body of its dead foe; regretfully,
for by inclination the Quedak was herbivorous. When he had finished,
the Quedak knew that he was in desperate need of a long period of rest.
Only after that could the full Quedak powers be regained.

He crawled up and down the piles of goods in the yard, looking for a
place to hide. Carefully he examined several bales. At last he reached
a stack of heavy boxes. One of the boxes had a crack just large enough
to admit him.

The Quedak crawled inside, down the shiny, oil-slick surface of a
machine, to the far end of the box. There he went into the dreamless,
defenseless sleep of the Quedak, serenely trusting in what the future
would bring.


PART TWO


I

The big gaff-headed schooner was pointed directly at the reef-enclosed
island, moving toward it with the solidity of an express train. The
sails billowed under powerful gusts of the northwest breeze, and the
rusty Allison-Chambers diesel rumbled beneath a teak grating. The
skipper and mate stood on the bridge deck and watched the reef approach.

"Anything yet?" the skipper asked. He was a stocky, balding man with
a perpetual frown on his face. He had been sailing his schooner among
the uncharted shoals and reefs of the Southwest Pacific for twenty-five
years. He frowned because his old ship was not insurable. His deck
cargo, however, _was_ insured. Some of it had come all the way from
Ogdensville, that transshipment center in the desert where spaceships
landed.

"Not a thing," the mate said. He was watching the dazzling white wall
of coral, looking for the gleam of blue that would reveal the narrow
pass to the inner lagoon. This was his first trip to the Solomon
Islands. A former television repairman in Sydney before he got the
wanderlust, the mate wondered if the skipper had gone crazy and planned
a spectacular suicide against the reef.

"Still nothing!" he shouted. "Shoals ahead!"

"I'll take it," the skipper said to the helmsman. He gripped the wheel
and watched the unbroken face of the reef.

"Nothing," the mate said. "Skipper, we'd better come about."

"Not if we're going to get through the pass," the skipper said. He was
beginning to get worried. But he had promised to deliver goods to the
American treasure-hunters on this island, and the skipper's word was
his bond. He had picked up the cargo in Rabaul and made his usual stops
at the settlements on New Georgia and Malaita. When he finished here,
he could look forward to a thousand-mile run to New Caledonia.

"There it is!" the mate shouted.

A thin slit of blue had appeared in the coral wall. They were less than
thirty yards from it now, and the old schooner was making close to
eight knots.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the ship entered the pass, the skipper threw the wheel hard over.
The schooner spun on its keel. Coral flashed by on either side, close
enough to touch. There was a metallic shriek as an upper main-mast
spreader snagged and came free. Then they were in the pass, bucking a
six-knot current.

The mate pushed the diesel to full throttle, then sprang back to help
the skipper wrestle with the wheel. Under sail and power the schooner
forged through the pass, scraped by an outcropping to port, and came
onto the placid surface of the lagoon.

The skipper mopped his forehead with a large blue bandanna. "Very snug
work," he said.

"_Snug!_" the mate cried. He turned away, and the skipper smiled a
brief smile.

They slid past a small ketch riding at anchor. The native hands took
down sail and the schooner nosed up to a rickety pier that jutted out
from the beach. Lines were made fast to palm trees. From the fringe of
jungle above the beach a white man came down, walking briskly in the
noonday heat.

He was very tall and thin, with knobby knees and elbows. The fierce
Melanesian sun had burned out but not tanned him, and his nose and
cheekbones were peeling. His horn-rimmed glasses had broken at the
hinge and been repaired with a piece of tape. He looked eager, boyish,
and curiously naive.

One hell-of-a-looking treasure-hunter, the mate thought.

"Glad to see you!" the man called out. "We'd about given you up for
lost."

"Not likely," the skipper said. "Mr. Sorensen, I'd like you to meet my
new mate, Mr. Willis."

"Glad to meet you, Professor," the mate said.

"I'm not a professor," Sorensen said, "but thanks anyhow."

"Where are the others?" the skipper asked.

"Out in the jungle," Sorensen said. "All except Drake, and he'll be
down here shortly. You'll stay a while, won't you?"

"Only to unload," the skipper said. "Have to catch the tide out of
here. How's the treasure-hunting?"

"We've done a lot of digging," Sorensen said. "We still have our hopes."

"But no doubloons yet?" the skipper asked. "No pieces of eight?"

"Not a damned one," Sorensen said wearily. "Did you bring the
newspapers, Skipper?"

"That I did," Sorensen replied. "They're in the cabin. Did you hear
about that second spaceship going to Mars?"

"Heard about it on the short wave," Sorensen said. "It didn't bring
back much, did it?"

"Practically nothing. Still, just think of it. _Two_ spaceships to
Mars, and I hear they're getting ready to put one on Venus."

The three men looked around them and grinned.

"Well," the skipper said, "I guess maybe the space age hasn't reached
the Southwest Pacific yet. And it certainly hasn't gotten to _this_
place. Come on, let's unload the cargo."

       *       *       *       *       *

This place was the island of Vuanu, southernmost of the Solomons,
almost in the Louisade Archipelago. It was a fair-sized volcanic
island, almost twenty miles long and several wide. Once it had
supported half a dozen native villages. But the population had begun to
decline after the depredations of the blackbirders in the 1850s. Then
a measles epidemic wiped out almost all the rest, and the survivors
emigrated to New Georgia. A ship-watcher had been stationed here during
the Second World War, but no ships had come this way. The Japanese
invasion had poured across New Guinea and the upper Solomons, and
further north through Micronesia. At the end of the war Vuanu was still
deserted. It was not made into a bird sanctuary like Canton Island,
or a cable station like Christmas Island, or a refueling point like
Cocos-Keeling. No one even wanted to explode alphabet bombs on it.
Vuanu was a worthless, humid, jungle-covered piece of land, free to
anyone who wanted it.

William Sorensen, general manager of a chain of liquor stores in
California, decided he wanted it.

Sorensen's hobby was treasure-hunting. He had looked for Lafitte's
treasure in Louisiana and Texas, and for the Lost Dutchman Mine
in Arizona. He had found neither. His luck had been better on the
wreck-strewn Gulf coast, and on an expedition to Dagger Cay in the
Caribbean he had found a double handful of Spanish coins in a rotting
canvas bag. The coins were worth about three thousand dollars. The
expedition had cost very much more, but Sorensen felt amply repaid.

For many years he had been interested in the Spanish treasure galleon
_Santa Teresa_. Contemporary accounts told how the ship, heavily laden
with bullion, sailed from Manila in 1689. The clumsy ship, caught in a
storm, had run off to the south and been wrecked. Eighteen survivors
managed to get ashore with the treasure. They buried it, and set sail
for the Phillipines in the ship's pinnacle. Two of them were alive when
the boat reached Manila.

The treasure island was tentatively identified as one of the Solomons.
But which one?

No one knew. Treasure-hunters looked for the cache on Bougainville
and Buka. There was a rumor about it on Malaita, and even Ontong Java
received an expedition. But no treasure was recovered.

Sorensen, researching the problem thoroughly, decided that the _Santa
Teresa_ had sailed completely through the Solomons, almost to the
Louisades. The ship must have escaped destruction until it crashed into
the reef at Vuanu.

His desire to search for the treasure might have remained only a dream
if he hadn't met Dan Drake. Drake was also an amateur treasure-hunter.
More important, he owned a fifty-five-foot Hanna ketch.

Over an evening's drinks the Vuanu expedition was born.

Additional members were recruited. Drake's ketch was put into seagoing
condition, equipment and money saved or gathered. Several other
possible treasure sites in the Southwest Pacific were researched.
Finally, vacation time was synchronized and the expedition got under
way.

They had put in three months' work on Vuanu already. Their morale was
high, in spite of inevitable conflicts between members. This schooner,
bringing in supplies from Sydney and Rabaul, was the last civilized
contact they would have for another six months.

       *       *       *       *       *

While Sorensen nervously supervised, the crew of the schooner unloaded
the cargo. He didn't want any of the equipment, some of it shipped over
six thousand miles, to be broken now. No replacements were possible;
whatever they didn't have, they would have to do without. He breathed
out in relief when the last crate, containing a metals detector, was
safely hoisted over the side and put on the beach above the high-water
mark.

There was something odd about that box. He examined it and found a
quarter-sized hole in one end. It had not been properly sealed.

Dan Drake, the co-manager of the expedition, joined him. "What's
wrong?" Drake asked.

"Hole in that crate," Sorensen said. "Salt water might have gotten in.
We'll be in tough shape if this detector doesn't work."

Drake nodded. "We better open it and see." He was a short, deeply
tanned, broad-chested man with close-cropped black hair and a straggly
mustache. He wore an old yachting cap jammed down over his eyes, giving
his face a tough bulldog look. He pulled a big screwdriver from his
belt and inserted it into the crack.

"Wait a moment," Sorensen said. "Let's get it up to the camp first.
Easier to carry the crate than something packed in grease."

"Right," Drake said. "Take the other end."

The camp was built in a clearing a hundred yards from the beach, on the
site of an abandoned native village. They had been able to re-thatch
several huts, and there was an old copra shed with a galvanized iron
roof where they stored their supplies. Here they got the benefit of any
breeze from the sea. Beyond the clearing, the gray-green jungle sprang
up like a solid wall.

Sorensen and Drake set the case down. The skipper, who had accompanied
them with the newspapers, looked around at the bleak huts and shook his
head.

"Would you like a drink, Skipper?" Sorensen asked. "Afraid we can't
offer any ice."

"A drink would be fine," the skipper said. He wondered what drove
men to a godforsaken place like this in search of imaginary Spanish
treasure.

Sorensen went into one of the huts and brought out a bottle of Scotch
and a tin cup. Drake had taken out his screwdriver and was vigorously
ripping boards off the crate.

"How does it look?" Sorensen asked.

"It's OK," Drake said, gently lifting out the metals detector. "Heavily
greased. Doesn't seem like there was any damage--"

He jumped back. The skipper had come forward and stamped down heavily
on the sand.

"What's the matter?" Sorensen asked.

"Looked like a scorpion," the skipper said. "Damned thing crawled right
out of your crate there. Might have bit you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sorensen shrugged. He had gotten used to the presence of an infinite
number of insects during his three months on Vuanu. Another bug more or
less didn't seem to make much difference.

"Another drink?" he asked.

"Can't do it," the skipper said regretfully. "I'd better get started.
All your party healthy?"

"All healthy so far," Sorensen said. He smiled. "Except for some bad
cases of gold fever."

"You'll never find gold in this place," the skipper said seriously.
"I'll look in on you in about six months. Good luck."

After shaking hands, the skipper went down to the beach and boarded his
ship. As the first pink flush of sunset touched the sky, the schooner
was under way. Sorensen and Drake watched it negotiate the pass. For a
few minutes its masts were visible above the reef. Then they had dipped
below the horizon.

"That's that," Drake said. "Us crazy American treasure-hunters are
alone again."

"You don't think he suspected anything?" Sorensen asked.

"Definitely not. As far as he's concerned, we're just crackpots."

Grinning, they looked back at their camp. Under the copra shed was
nearly fifty thousand dollars worth of gold and silver bullion, dug out
of the jungle and carefully reburied. They had located a part of the
_Santa Teresa_ treasure during their first month on the island. There
was every indication of more to come. Since they had no legal title to
the land, the expedition was not eager to let the news get out. Once it
was known, every gold-hungry vagabond from Perth to Papeete would be
heading to Vuanu.

"The boy'll be in soon," Drake said. "Let's get some stew going."

"Right," Sorensen said. He took a few steps and stopped. "That's funny."

"What is?"

"That scorpion the skipper squashed. It's gone."

"Maybe he missed it," Drake said. "Or maybe he just pushed it down into
the sand. What difference does it make?"

"None, I guess," Sorensen said.


II

Edward Eakins walked through the jungle with a long-handled spade on
his shoulder, sucking reflectively on a piece of candy. It was the
first he'd had in weeks, and he was enjoying it to the utmost. He
was in very good spirits. The schooner yesterday had brought in not
only machinery and replacement parts, but also candy, cigarettes and
food. He had eaten scrambled eggs this morning, and real bacon. The
expedition was becoming almost civilized.

Something rustled in the bushes near him. He marched on, ignoring it.

He was a lean, sandy-haired man, amiable and slouching, with pale blue
eyes and an unprepossessing manner. He felt very lucky to have been
taken on the expedition. His gas station didn't put him on a financial
par with the others, and he hadn't been able to put up a full share
of the money. He still felt guilty about that. He had been accepted
because he was an eager and indefatigable treasure-hunter with a good
knowledge of jungle ways. Equally important, he was a skilled radio
operator and repairman. He had kept the transmitter on the ketch in
working condition in spite of salt water and mildew.

He could pay his full share now, of course. But _now_, when they were
practically rich, didn't really count. He wished there were some way he
could--

There was that rustle in the bushes again.

Eakins stopped and waited. The bushes trembled. And out stepped a mouse.

Eakins was amazed. The mice on this island, like most wild animal life,
were terrified of man. Although they feasted off the refuse of the
camp--when the rats didn't get it first--they carefully avoided any
contact with humans.

"You better get yourself home," Eakins said to the mouse.

The mouse stared at him. He stared back. It was a pretty little mouse,
no more than four or five inches long, and colored a light tawny brown.
It didn't seem afraid.

"So long, mouse," Eakins said. "I got work to do." He shifted his spade
to the other shoulder and turned to go. As he turned, he caught a flash
of brown out of the corner of his eye. Instinctively he ducked. The
mouse whirled past him, turned, and gathered itself for another leap.

"Mouse, are you out of your head?" Eakins asked.

The mouse bared its tiny teeth and sprang. Eakins knocked it aside.

"Now get the hell out of here," he said. He was beginning to wonder if
the rodent was crazy. Did it have rabies, perhaps?

The mouse gathered itself for another charge. Eakins lifted the spade
off his shoulders and waited. When the mouse sprang, he met it with a
carefully timed blow. Then carefully, regretfully, he battered it to
death.

"Can't have rabid mice running around," he said.

But the mouse hadn't seemed rabid; it had just seemed very determined.

Eakins scratched his head. Now what, he wondered, had gotten into that
little mouse?

In the camp that evening, Eakins' story was greeted with hoots of
laughter. It was just like Eakins to be attacked by a mouse. Several
men suggested that he go armed in case the mouse's family wanted
revenge. Eakins just smiled sheepishly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two days later, Sorensen and Al Cable were finishing up a morning's
hard work at Site 4, two miles from the camp. The metals detector had
shown marked activity at this spot. They were seven feet down and
nothing had been produced yet except a high mound of yellow-brown earth.

"That detector must be wrong," Cable said, wiping his face wearily.
He was a big, pinkish man. He had sweated off twenty pounds on Vuanu,
picked up a bad case of prickly heat, and had enough treasure-hunting
to last him a lifetime. He wished he were back in Baltimore taking care
of his used-car agency. He didn't hesitate to say so, often and loudly.
He was one member who had not worked out well.

"Nothing wrong with the detector," Sorensen said. "Trouble is, we're
digging in swampy ground. The cache must have sunk."

"It's probably a hundred feet down," Cable said, stabbing angrily at
the gluey mud.

"Nope," Sorensen said. "There's volcanic rock under us, no more than
twenty feet down."

"Twenty feet? We should have a bulldozer."

"Might be costly bringing one in," Sorensen said mildly. "Come on, Al,
let's get back to camp."

Sorensen helped Cable out of the excavation. They cleaned off their
tools and started toward the narrow path leading back to the camp. They
stopped abruptly.

A large, ugly bird had stepped out of the brush. It was standing on the
path, blocking their way.

"What in hell is that?" Cable asked.

"A cassowary," Sorensen said.

"Well, let's boot it out of the way and get going."

"Take it easy," Sorensen said. "If anyone does any booting, it'll be
the bird. Back away slowly."

The cassowary was nearly five feet high, a black-feathered ostrich-like
bird standing erect on powerful legs. Each of its feet was three-toed,
and the toes curved into heavy talons. It had a yellowish, bony head
and short, useless wings. From its neck hung a brilliant wattle colored
red, green, and purple.

"It is dangerous?" Cable asked.

Sorensen nodded. "Natives on New Guinea have been kicked to death by
those birds."

"Why haven't we seen it before?" Cable asked.

"They're usually very shy," Sorensen said. "They stay as far from
people as they can."

"This one sure isn't shy," Cable said, as the cassowary took a step
toward them. "Can we run?"

"The bird can run a lot faster," Sorensen said. "I don't suppose you
have a gun with you?"

"Of course not. There's been nothing to shoot."

       *       *       *       *       *

Backing away, they held their spades like spears. The brush crackled
and an anteater emerged. It was followed by a wild pig. The three
beasts converged on the men, backing them toward the dense wall of the
jungle.

"They're herding us," Cable said, his voice going shrill.

"Take it easy," Sorensen said. "The cassowary is the only one we have
to watch out for."

"Aren't anteaters dangerous?"

"Only to ants."

"The hell you say," Cable said. "Bill, the animals on this island have
gone crazy. Remember Eakins' mouse?"

"I remember it," Sorensen said. They had reached the far edge of the
clearing. The beasts were in front of them, still advancing, with the
cassowary in the center. Behind them lay the jungle--and whatever they
were being herded toward.

"We'll have to make a break for it," Sorensen said.

"That damned bird is blocking the trail."

"We'll have to knock him over," Sorensen said. "Watch out for his feet.
Let's go!"

They raced toward the cassowary, swinging their spades. The cassowary
hesitated, unable to make up its mind between targets. Then it turned
toward Cable and its right leg lashed out. The partially deflected blow
sounded like the flat of a meat cleaver against a side of beef. Cable
grunted and collapsed, clutching his ribs.

Sorensen stabbed, and the honed edge of his spade nearly severed the
cassowary's head from its body. The wild pig and the anteater were
coming at him now. He flailed with his spade, driving them back. Then,
with a strength he hadn't known he possessed, he stooped, lifted Cable
across his shoulders and ran down the path.

A quarter of a mile down he had to stop, completely out of breath.
There were no sounds behind him. The other animals were apparently not
following. He went back to the wounded man.

Cable had begun to recover consciousness. He was able to walk,
half-supported by Sorensen. When they reached the camp, Sorensen called
everybody in for a meeting. He counted heads while Eakins taped up
Cable's side. Only one man was missing.

"Where's Drake?" Sorensen asked.

"He's across the island at North Beach, fishing," said Tom Recetich.
"Want me to get him?"

Sorensen hesitated. Finally he said, "No. I'd better explain what
we're up against. Then we'll issue the guns. _Then_ we'll try to find
Drake."

"Man, what's going on?" Recetich asked.

Sorensen began to explain what had happened at Site 4.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fishing provided an important part of the expedition's food and there
was no work Drake liked better. At first he had gone out with face
mask and spear gun. But the sharks in this corner of the world were
numerous, hungry and aggressive. So, regretfully, he had given up skin
diving and set out handlines on the leeward side of the island.

The lines were out now, and Drake lay in the shade of a palm tree,
half asleep, his big forearms folded over his chest. His dog, Oro, was
prowling the beach in search of hermit crabs. Oro was a good-natured
mutt, part airdale, part terrier, part unknown. He was growling at
something now.

"Leave the crabs alone," Drake called out. "You'll just get nipped
again."

Oro was still growling. Drake rolled over and saw that the dog was
standing stiff-legged over a large insect. It looked like some kind of
scorpion.

"Oro, leave that blasted--"

Before Drake could move, the insect sprang. It landed on Oro's neck and
the jointed tail whipped out. Oro yelped once. Drake was on his feet
instantly. He swatted at the bug, but it jumped off the dog's neck and
scuttled into the brush.

"Take it easy, old boy," Drake said. "That's a nasty-looking wound.
Might be poisoned. I better open it up."

He held the panting dog firmly and drew his boat knife. He had operated
on the dog for snake bite in Central America, and in the Adirondacks
he had held him down and pulled porcupine quills out of his mouth with
a pair of pliers. The dog always knew he was being helped. He never
struggled.

This time, the dog bit.

"Oro!" Drake grabbed the dog at the jaw hinge with his free hand. He
brought pressure to bear, paralyzing the muscles, forcing the dog's
jaws open. He pulled his hand out and flung the dog away. Oro rolled to
his feet and advanced on him again.

"Stand!" Drake shouted. The dog kept coming, edging around to get
between the ocean and the man.

Turning, Drake saw the bug emerge from the jungle and creep toward him.
His dog had circled around and was trying to drive him toward the bug.

Drake didn't know what was going on, and he decided he'd better not
stay to find out. He picked up his knife and threw it at the bug. He
missed. The bug was almost within jumping distance.

Drake ran toward the ocean. When Oro tried to intercept him, he kicked
the dog out of the way and plunged into the water.

He began to swim around the island to the camp, hoping he'd make it
before the sharks got him.


III

At the camp, rifles and revolvers were hastily wiped clean of cosmoline
and passed around. Binoculars were taken out and adjusted. Cartridges
were divided up, and the supply of knives, machetes and hatchets
quickly disappeared. The expedition's two walkie-talkies were unpacked,
and the men prepared to move out in search of Drake. Then they saw him,
swimming vigorously around the edge of the island.

He waded ashore, tired but uninjured. He and the others put their
information together and reached some unhappy conclusions.

"Do you mean to say," Cable demanded, "that a _bug_ is doing all this?"

"It looks that way," Sorensen said. "We have to assume that it's able
to exercise some kind of thought control. Maybe hypnotic or telepathic."

"It has to sting first," Drake said. "That's what it did with Oro."

"I just can't imagine a scorpion doing all that," Recetich said.

"It's not a scorpion," Drake said. "I saw it close up. It's got a tail
like a scorpion, but its head is damn near four times as big, and its
body is different. Up close, it doesn't look like anything you ever saw
before."

"Do you think it's native to this island?" asked Monty Byrnes, a
treasure-seeker from Indianapolis.

"I doubt it," Drake said. "If it is, why did it leave us and the
animals alone for three months?"

"That's right," Sorensen said. "All our troubles began just after the
schooner came. The schooner must have brought it from somewhere....
Hey!"

"What is it?" Drake asked.

"Remember that scorpion the skipper tried to squash? It came out of the
detector crate. Do you think it could be the same one?"

Drake shrugged his shoulders. "Could be. Seems to me our problem right
now isn't finding out where it came from. We have to figure out what to
do about it."

"If it can control animals," Byrnes said, "I wonder if it can control
men."

       *       *       *       *       *

They were all silent. They had moved into a circle near the copra shed,
and while they talked they watched the jungle for any sign of insect or
animal life.

Sorensen said, "We'd better radio for help."

"If we do that," Recetich said, "somebody's going to find out about the
_Santa Teresa_ treasure. We'll be overrun in no time."

"Maybe so," Sorensen said. "But at the worst, we've cleared expenses.
We've even made a small profit."

"And if we don't get help," Drake said, "we may be in no condition to
take anything out of here."

"The problem isn't as bad as all that," Byrnes said. "We've got guns.
We can take care of the animals."

"You haven't seen the bug yet," Drake said.

"We'll squash it."

"That won't be easy," Drake said. "It's faster than hell. And how are
you going to squash it if it comes into your hut some night while
you're asleep? We could post guards and they wouldn't even see the
thing."

Brynes shuddered involuntarily. "Yeah, I guess you're right. Maybe we'd
better radio for help."

Eakins stood up. "Well, gents," he said, "I guess that means me. I just
hope the batteries on the ketch are up to charge."

"It'll be dangerous going out there," Drake said. "We'll draw lots."

Eakins was amused. "We will? How many of you can operate a transmitter?"

Drake said, "I can."

"No offense meant," Eakins said, "but you don't operate that set of
yours worth a damn. You don't even know Morse for key transmission. And
can you fix the set if it goes out?"

"No," Drake said. "But the whole thing is too risky. We all should go."

Eakins shook his head. "Safest thing all around is if you cover me from
the beach. That bug probably hasn't thought about the ketch yet."

Eakins stuck a tool kit in his pocket and strapped one of the camp's
walkie-talkies over his shoulder. He handed the other one to Sorensen.
He hurried down the beach past the launch and pushed the small dinghy
into the water. The men of the expedition spread out, their rifles
ready. Eakins got into the dinghy and started rowing across the quiet
lagoon.

They saw him tie up to the ketch and pause a moment, looking around.
Then he climbed aboard. Quickly he slid back the hatch and went inside.

"Everything all right?" Sorensen asked.

"No trouble yet," Eakins said, his voice sounding thin and sharp over
the walkie-talkie. "I'm at the transmitter now, turning it on. It needs
a couple of minutes to warm up."

Drake nudged Sorensen. "Look over there."

On the reef, almost hidden by the ketch, something was moving. Using
binoculars, Sorensen could see three big gray rats slipping into the
water. They began swimming toward the ketch.

"Start firing!" Sorensen said. "Eakins, get out of there!"

"I've got the transmitter going," Eakins said. "I just need a couple of
minutes more to get a message off."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bullets sent up white splashes around the swimming rats. One was hit;
the other two managed to put the ketch between them and the riflemen.
Studying the reef with his binoculars, Sorensen saw an anteater cross
the reef and splash into the water. It was followed by a wild pig.

There was a crackle of static from the walkie-talkie. Sorensen called,
"Eakins, have you got that message off?"

"Haven't sent it," Eakins called back. "Listen, Bill. We _mustn't_ send
any messages! That bug wants--" He stopped abruptly.

"What is it?" Sorensen asked. "What's happening?"

Eakins had appeared on deck, still holding the walkie-talkie. He was
backing toward the stern.

"Hermit crabs," he said. "They climbed up the anchor line. I'm going to
swim to shore."

"Don't do it," Sorensen said.

"Gotta do it," Eakins said. "They'll probably follow me. All of you
come out here and _get that transmitter_. Bring it ashore."

Through his binoculars, Sorensen could see a solid gray carpet of
hermit crabs crawling down the deck and waterways of the ketch. Eakins
jumped into the water. He swam furiously toward shore, and Sorensen saw
the rats turn and follow him. Hermit crabs swarmed off the boat, and
the wild pig and the anteater paddled after him, trying to head him off
before he reached the beach.

"Come on," Sorensen said. "I don't know what Eakins figured out, but we
better get that transmitter while we have a chance."

They ran down the beach and put the launch into the water. Two hundred
yards away, Eakins had reached the far edge of the beach with the
animals in close pursuit. He broke into the jungle, still clinging to
his walkie-talkie.

"Eakins?" Sorensen asked into the walkie-talkie.

"I'm all right," Eakins said, panting hard for air. "Get that
transmitter, and don't forget the batteries!"

The men boarded the ketch. Working furiously, they ripped the
transmitter off its bulkhead and dragged it up the companionway steps.
Drake came last, carrying a twelve-volt battery. He went down again and
brought up a second battery. He hesitated a moment, then went below for
a third time.

"Drake!" Sorensen shouted. "Quit holding us up!"

Drake reappeared, carrying the ketch's two radio direction finders and
the compass. He handed them down and jumped into the launch.

"OK," he said. "Let's go."

       *       *       *       *       *

They rowed to the beach. Sorensen was trying to re-establish contact
with Eakins on the walkie-talkie, but all he could hear was static.
Then, as the launch grounded on the beach, he heard Eakins' voice.

"I'm surrounded," he said, very quietly. "I guess I'll have to see what
Mr. Bug wants. Maybe I can swat him first, though."

There was a long silence. Then Eakins said, "It's coming toward me now.
Drake was right. It sure isn't like any bug _I've_ ever seen. I'm going
to swat hell out of--"

They heard him scream, more in surprise than pain.

Sorensen said, "Eakins, can you hear me? Where are you? Can we help?"

"It sure _is_ fast," Eakins said, his voice conversational again.
"Fastest damned bug I've ever seen. Jumped on my neck, stung me and
jumped off again."

"How do you feel?" Sorensen asked.

"Fine," Eakins said. "Hardly felt the sting."

"Where is the bug now?"

"Back in the bush."

"The animals?"

"They went away. You know," Eakins said, "maybe this thing doesn't
work on humans. Maybe--"

"What?" Sorensen asked. "What's happening now?"

There was a long silence. Then Eakins' voice, low-pitched and calm,
came over the walkie-talkie.

"We'll speak with you again later," Eakins said. "We must take
consultation now and decide what to do with you."

"_Eakins!_"

There was no answer from the other end of the walkie-talkie.


IV

Returning to their camp, the men were in a mood of thorough depression.
They couldn't understand what had happened to Eakins and they didn't
feel like speculating on it. The ravaging afternoon sun beat down,
reflecting heat back from the white sand. The damp jungle steamed, and
appeared to creep toward them like a huge and sleepy green dragon,
trapping them against the indifferent sea. Gun barrels grew too hot to
touch, and the water in the canteens was as warm as blood. Overhead,
thick gray cumulus clouds began to pile up; it was the beginning of the
monsoon season.

Drake sat in the shade of the copra shed. He shook off his lethargy
long enough to inspect the camp from the viewpoint of defense. He saw
the encircling jungle as enemy territory. In front of it was an area
fifty yards deep which they had cleared. This no man's land could
perhaps be defended for a while.

Then came the huts and the copra shed, their last line of defense,
leading to the beach and the sea.

The expedition had been in complete control of this island for better
than three months. Now they were pinned to a small and precarious
beachhead.

Drake glanced at the lagoon behind him and remembered that there was
still one line of retreat open. If the bug and his damned menagerie
pressed too hard, they could still escape in the ketch. With luck.

Sorensen came over and sat down beside him. "What are you doing?" he
asked.

Drake grinned sourly. "Planning our master strategy."

"How does it look?"

"I think we can hold out," Drake said. "We've got plenty of ammo. If
necessary, we'll interdict the cleared area with gasoline. We certainly
aren't going to let that bug push us off the island." He thought for a
moment. "But it's going to be damned hard digging for treasure."

Sorensen nodded. "I wonder what the bug wants."

"Maybe we'll find out from Eakins," Drake said.

       *       *       *       *       *

They had to wait half an hour. Then Eakins' voice came, sharp and
shrill over the walkie-talkie.

"Sorensen? Drake?"

"We're here," Drake said. "What did that damned bug do to you?"

"Nothing," Eakins said. "You are talking to that bug now. My name is
the Quedak."

"My God," Drake said to Sorensen, "that bug must have hypnotized him!"

"No. You are not speaking to a hypnotized Eakins. Nor are you speaking
to a creature who is simply using Eakins as a mouthpiece. Nor are you
speaking to the Eakins who was. You are speaking to many individuals
who are one."

"I don't get that," Drake said.

"It's very simple," Eakins' voice replied. "I am the Quedak, the
totality. But my totality is made up of separate parts, which
are Eakins, several rats, a dog named Oro, a pig, an anteater, a
cassowary--"

"Hold on," Sorensen said. "Let me get this straight. This is _not_
Eakins I'm speaking to. This is the--the Quedak?"

"That is correct."

"And you control Eakins and the others? You speak through Eakins'
mouth?"

"Also correct. But that doesn't mean that the personalities of
the others are obliterated. Quite the contrary, the Quedak state
is a federation in which the various member parts retain their
idiosyncrasies, their individual needs and desires. They give their
knowledge, their power, their special outlook to the Quedak whole. The
Quedak is the coordinating and command center; but the individual parts
supply the knowledge, the insights, the special skills. And together we
form the Great Cooperation."

"Cooperation?" Drake said. "But you did all this by force!"

"It was necessary in the beginning. Otherwise, how would other
creatures have known about the Great Cooperation?"

"Would they stay if you released your control over them?" Drake asked.

"That is a meaningless question. We form a single indivisible entity
now. Would your arm return to you if you cut it off?"

"It isn't the same thing."

"It is," Eakins' voice said. "We are a single organism. We are still
growing. And we welcome you wholeheartedly into the Great Cooperation."

"To hell with that," Drake said.

"But you must join," the Quedak told them. "It is the Quedak Mission to
coordinate all sentient creatures into a single collective organism.
Believe me, there is only the most trifling loss of the individuality
you prize so highly. And you gain so much more! You learn the
viewpoints and special knowledge of all other creatures. Within the
Quedak framework you can fully realize your potentialities--"

"No!"

"I am sorry," the Quedak said. "The Quedak Mission must be fulfilled.
You will not join us willingly?"

"Never," Drake said.

"Then _we_ will join _you_," the Quedak said.

There was a click as he turned off the walkie-talkie.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the fringe of the jungle, several rats appeared. They hesitated,
just out of rifle range. A bird of paradise flew overhead, hovering
over the cleared area like an observation plane. As the men watched,
the rats began to run forward in long zigzags.

"Start firing," Drake called out. "But go easy with the ammo."

The men began to fire. But it was difficult to sight on the
quick-moving rats against the grayish-brown clearing. And almost
immediately, the rats were joined by a dozen hermit crabs. They had
an uncanny knack for moving when no one was watching them, darting
forward, then freezing against the neutral background.

They saw Eakins appear on the fringe of the jungle.

"Lousy traitor," Cable said, raising his rifle.

Sorensen slapped the muzzle of the rifle aside. "Don't do it."

"But he's helping that bug!"

"He can't help it," Sorensen said. "And he's not armed. Leave him
alone."

Eakins watched for a few moments, then melted back into the jungle.

The attack by the rats and crabs swept across half of the cleared
space. Then, as they came closer, the men were able to pick their
targets with more accuracy. Nothing was able to get closer than twenty
yards. And when Recetich shot down the bird of paradise, the attack
began to falter.

"You know," Drake said, "I think we're going to be all right."

"Could be," said Sorensen. "I don't understand what the Quedak is
trying to accomplish. He knows we can't be taken like this. I should
think--"

"Hey!" one of the men called out. "Our boat!"

They turned and saw why the Quedak had ordered the attack. While it
had occupied their attention, Drake's dog had swum out to the ketch
and gnawed through the anchor line. Unattended, the ketch was drifting
before the wind, moving toward the reef. They saw it bump gently, then
harder. In a moment it was heeled hard over, stuck in the coral.

There was a burst of static from the walkie-talkie. Sorensen held it
up and heard the Quedak say, "The ketch isn't seriously damaged. It's
simply immobilized."

"The hell you say," Drake growled. "For all you know, it's got a hole
punched right through it. How do you plan on getting off the island,
Quedak? Or are you just going to stay here?"

"I will leave at the proper time," the Quedak said. "I want to make
sure that we all leave together."


V

The wind died. Huge gray thunderheads piled up in the sky to the
southeast, their tops lost in the upper atmosphere, their black anvil
bottoms pressing the hot still air upon the island. The sun had lost
its fiery glare. Cherry-red, it slid listlessly toward the flat sea.

High overhead, a single bird of paradise circled, just out of rifle
range. It had gone up ten minutes after Recetich had shot the first one
down.

Monty Byrnes stood on the edge of the cleared area, his rifle ready.
He had drawn the first guard shift. The rest of the men were eating a
hasty dinner inside the copra shed. Sorensen and Drake were outside,
looking over the situation.

Drake said, "By nightfall we'll have to pull everybody back into the
shed. Can't take a chance on being exposed to the Quedak in the dark."

Sorensen nodded. He seemed to have aged ten years in a day's time.

"In the morning," Drake said, "we'll be able to work something out
We'll.... What's wrong, Bill?"

"Do you really think we have a chance?" Sorensen asked.

"Sure we do. We've got a damned good chance."

"Be realistic," Sorensen said. "The longer this goes on, the more
animals the Quedak can throw against us. What can we do about it?"

"Hunt him out and kill him."

"The damned thing is about the size of your thumb," Sorensen said
irritably. "How can we hunt him?"

"We'll figure out something," Drake said. He was beginning to get
worried about Sorensen. The morale among the men was low enough without
Sorensen pushing it down further.

"I wish someone would shoot that damned bird," Sorensen said, glancing
overhead.

About every fifteen minutes, the bird of paradise came darting down for
a closer look at the camp. Then, before the guard had a chance to fire,
he swept back up to a safe altitude.

"It's getting on my nerves, too," Drake said. "Maybe that's what it's
supposed to do. One of these times we'll--"

He stopped abruptly. From the copra shed he could hear the loud hum of
a radio. And he heard Al Cable saying, "Hello, hello, this is Vuanu
calling. We need help."

Drake and Sorensen went into the shed. Cable was sitting in front of
the transmitter, saying into the microphone, "Emergency, emergency,
Vuanu calling, we need--"

"What in hell do you think you're doing?" Drake snapped.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cable turned and looked at him, his pudgy pink body streaked with
sweat. "I'm radioing for help, that's what I'm doing. I think I've
picked up somebody. But they haven't answered me yet."

He readjusted the tuning. Over the receiver, they could hear a bored
British voice saying, "Pawn to Queen four, eh? Why don't you ever try a
different opening?"

There was a sharp burst of static. "Just move," a deep bass voice
answered. "Just shut up and move."

"Sure," said the British voice. "Knight to king bishop three."

Drake recognized the voices. They were ham radio operators. One of
them owned a plantation on Bougainville; the other was a shopkeeper in
Rabaul. They came on the air for an hour of chess and argument every
evening.

Cable tapped the microphone impatiently. "Hello," he said, "this is
Vuanu calling, emergency call--"

Drake walked over and took the microphone out of Cable's hand. He put
it down carefully.

"We can't call for help," he said.

"What are you talking about?" Cable cried. "We have to!"

Drake felt very tired. "Look, if we send out a distress call,
somebody's going to come sailing right in--but they won't be prepared
for this kind of trouble. The Quedak will take them over and then use
them against us."

"We can explain what the trouble is," Cable said.

"_Explain?_ Explain _what_? That a bug is taking over the island?
They'd think we were crazy with fever. They'd send in a doctor on the
inter-island schooner."

"Dan's right," Sorensen said. "Nobody would believe this without seeing
it for himself."

"And by then," Drake said, "it'd be too late. Eakins figured it out
before the Quedak got him. That's why he told us not to send any
messages."

Cable looked dubious. "But why did he want us to take the transmitter?"

"So that _he_ couldn't send any messages after the bug got him," Drake
said. "The more people trampling around, the easier it would be for the
Quedak. If he had possession of the transmitter, he'd be calling for
help right now."

"Yeah, I suppose so," Cable said unhappily. "But, damn it, we can't
handle this _alone_."

"We have to. If the Quedak ever gets us and then gets off the island,
that's it for Earth. Period. There won't be any big war, no hydrogen
bombs or fallout, no heroic little resistance groups. Everybody will
become part of the Quedak Cooperation."

"We ought to get help somehow," Cable said stubbornly. "We're alone,
isolated. Suppose we ask for a ship to stand offshore--"

"It won't work," Drake said. "Besides, we couldn't ask for help even if
we wanted to."

"Why not?"

"Because the transmitter's not working," Drake said. "You've been
talking into a dead mike."

"It's receiving OK," Cable said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Drake checked to see if all the switches were on. "Nothing wrong with
the receiver. But we must have joggled something taking the transmitter
out of the ship. It isn't working."

Cable tapped the dead microphone several times, then put it down. They
stood around the receiver, listening to the chess game between the man
in Rabaul and the man in Bougainville.

"Pawn to queen bishop four."

"Pawn to king three."

"Knight to Queen bishop three."

There was a sudden staccato burst of static. It faded, then came again
in three distinct bursts.

"What do you suppose that is?" Sorensen asked.

Drake shrugged his shoulders. "Could be anything. Storm's shaping up
and--"

He stopped. He had been standing beside the door of the shed. As the
static crackled, he saw the bird of paradise dive for a closer look.
The static stopped when the bird returned to its slow-circling higher
altitude.

"That's strange," Drake said. "Did you see that, Bill? The bird came
down and the static went on at the same time."

"I saw it," Sorensen said. "Think it means anything?"

"I don't know. Let's see." Drake took out his field glasses. He turned
up the volume of the receiver and stepped outside where he could
observe the jungle. He waited, hearing the sounds of the chess game
three or four hundred miles away.

"Come on now, move."

"Give me a minute."

"A minute? Listen, I can't stand in front of this bleeding set all
night. Make your--"

Static crackled sharply. Drake saw four wild pigs come trotting out of
the jungle, moving slowly, like a reconnaissance squad probing for weak
spots in an enemy position. They stopped; the static stopped. Byrnes,
standing guard with his rifle, took a snap shot at them. The pigs
turned, and static crackled as they moved back into the jungle. There
was more static as the bird of paradise swept down for a look, then
climbed out of range. After that, the static stopped.

Drake put down his binoculars and went back inside the shed. "That must
be it," he said. "The static is related to the Quedak. I think it comes
when he's operating the animals."

"You mean he has come sort of radio control over them?" Sorensen asked.

"Seems like it," Drake said. "Either radio control or something
propagated along a radio wavelength."

"If that's the case," Sorensen said, "he's like a little radio station,
isn't he?"

"Sure he is. So what?"

"Then we should be able to locate him on a radio direction finder,"
Sorensen said.

Drake nodded emphatically. He snapped off the receiver, went to a
corner of the shed and took out one of their portable direction
finders. He set it to the frequency at which Cable had picked up the
Rabaul-Bougainville broadcast. Then he turned it on and walked to the
door.

       *       *       *       *       *

The men watched while Drake rotated the loop antenna. He located the
maximum signal, then turned the loop slowly, read the bearing and
converted it to a compass course. Then he sat down with a small-scale
chart of the Southwest Pacific.

"Well," Sorensen asked, "is it the Quedak?"

"It's got to be," said Drake. "I located a good null almost due south.
That's straight ahead in the jungle."

"You're sure it isn't a reciprocal bearing?"

"I checked that out."

"Is there any chance the signal comes from some other station?"

"Nope. Due south, the next station is Sydney, and that's seventeen
hundred miles away. Much too far for this RDF. It's the Quedak, all
right."

"So we have a way of locating him," Sorensen said. "Two men with
direction finders can go into the jungle--"

"--and get themselves killed," Drake said. "We can position the Quedak
with RDFs, but his animals can locate us a lot faster. We wouldn't have
a chance in the jungle."

Sorensen looked crestfallen. "Then we're no better off than before."

"We're a lot better off," Drake said. "We have a chance now."

"What makes you think so?"

"He controls the animals by radio," Drake said. "We know the frequency
he operates on. We can broadcast on the same frequency. We can jam his
signal."

"Are you sure about that?"

"Am I _sure_? Of course not. But I do know that two stations in the
same area can't broadcast over the same frequency. If we tuned in
to the frequency the Quedak uses, made enough noise to override his
signal--"

"I see," Sorensen said. "Maybe it would work! If we could interfere
with his signal, he wouldn't be able to control the animals. And then
we could hunt him down with the RDFs."

"That's the idea," Drake said. "It has only one small flaw--our
transmitter isn't working. With no transmitter, we can't do any
broadcasting. No broadcasting, no jamming."

"Can you fix it?" Sorensen asked.

"I'll try," Drake said. "But we'd better not hope for too much. Eakins
was the radio man on this expedition."

"We've got all the spare parts," Sorensen said. "Tubes, manual,
everything."

"I know. Give me enough time and I'll figure out what's wrong. The
question is, how much time is the Quedak going to give us?"

The bright copper disk of the sun was half submerged in the sea. Sunset
colors touched the massing thunderheads and faded into the brief
tropical twilight. The men began to barricade the copra shed for the
night.


VI

Drake removed the back from the transmitter and scowled at the compact
mass of tubes and wiring. Those metal boxlike things were probably
condensers, and the waxy cylindrical gadgets might or might not be
resistors. It all looked hopelessly complicated, ridiculously dense and
delicate. Where should he begin?

He turned on the set and waited a few minutes. All the tubes appeared
to go on, some dim, some bright. He couldn't detect any loose wires.
The mike was still dead.

So much for visual inspection. Next question: was the set getting
enough juice?

He turned it off and checked the battery cells with a voltmeter. The
batteries were up to charge. He removed the leads, scraped them and put
them back on, making sure they fit snugly. He checked all connections,
murmured a propitiatory prayer, and turned the set on.

It still didn't work.

Cursing, he turned it off again. He decided to replace all the tubes,
starting with the dim ones. If that didn't work, he could try replacing
condensers and resistors. If that didn't work, he could always shoot
himself. With this cheerful thought, he opened the parts kit and went
to work.

The men were all inside the copra shed, finishing the job of
barricading it for the night. The door was wedged shut and locked. The
two windows had to be kept open for ventilation; otherwise everyone
would suffocate in the heat. But a double layer of heavy mosquito
netting was nailed over each window, and a guard was posted beside it.

Nothing could get through the flat galvanized-iron roof. The floor was
of pounded earth, a possible danger point. All they could do was keep
watch over it.

The treasure-hunters settled down for a long night. Drake, with a
handkerchief tied around his forehead to keep the perspiration out of
his eyes, continued working on the transmitter.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, there was a buzz on the walkie-talkie. Sorensen picked
it up and said, "What do you want?"

"I want you to end this senseless resistance," said the Quedak,
speaking with Eakins' voice. "You've had enough time to think over the
situation. I want you to join me. Surely you can see there's no other
way."

"We don't want to join you," Sorensen said.

"You must," the Quedak told him.

"Are you going to make us?"

"That poses problems," the Quedak said. "My animal parts are not
suitable for coercion. Eakins is an excellent mechanism, but there is
only one of him. And I must not expose myself to unnecessary danger.
By doing so I would endanger the Quedak Mission."

"So it's a stalemate," Sorensen said.

"No. I am faced with difficulty only in taking you over. There is no
problem in killing you."

The men shifted uneasily. Drake, working on the transmitter, didn't
look up.

"I would rather _not_ kill you," the Quedak said. "But the Quedak
Mission is of primary importance. It would be endangered if you didn't
join. It would be seriously compromised if you left the island. So you
must either join or be killed."

"That's not the way I see it," Sorensen said. "If you killed
us--assuming that you can--you'd never get off this island. Eakins
can't handle that ketch."

"There would be no need to leave in the ketch," the Quedak said. "In
six months, the inter-island schooner will return. Eakins and I will
leave then. The rest of you will have died."

"You're bluffing," Sorensen said. "What makes you think you could kill
us? You didn't do so well today." He caught Drake's attention and
gestured at the radio. Drake shrugged his shoulders and went back to
work.

"I wasn't trying," the Quedak said. "The time for that was at night.
_This_ night, before you have a chance to work out a better system of
defense. You must join me tonight or I will kill one of you."

"One of us?"

"Yes. One man an hour. In that way, perhaps the survivors will change
their minds about joining. But if they don't, all of you will be dead
by morning."

Drake leaned over and whispered to Sorensen, "Stall him. Give me
another ten minutes. I think I've found the trouble."

Sorensen said into the walkie-talkie, "We'd like to know a little more
about the Quedak Cooperation."

"You can find out best by joining."

"We'd rather have a little more information on it first."

       *       *       *       *       *

"It is an indescribable state," the Quedak said in an urgent,
earnest, eager voice. "Can you imagine yourself as _yourself_ and yet
experiencing an entirely new series of sensory networks? You would, for
example, experience the world through the perceptors of a dog as he
goes through the forest following an odor which to him--and to you--is
as clear and vivid as a painted line. A hermit crab senses things
differently. From him you experience the slow interaction of life at
the margin of sea and land. His time-sense is very slow, unlike that
of a bird of paradise, whose viewpoint is spatial, rapid, cursory.
And there are many others, above and below the earth and water, who
furnish their own specialized viewpoints of reality. Their outlooks,
I have found, are not essentially different from those of the animals
that once inhabited Mars."

"What happened on Mars?" Sorensen asked.

"All life died," the Quedak mourned. "All except the Quedak. It
happened a long time ago. For centuries there was peace and prosperity
on the planet. Everything and everyone was part of the Quedak
Cooperation. But the dominant race was basically weak. Their breeding
rate went down; catastrophes happened. And finally there was no more
life except the Quedak."

"Sounds great," Sorensen said ironically.

"It was the fault of the race," the Quedak protested. "With sturdier
stock--such as you have on this planet--the will to live will remain
intact. The peace and prosperity will continue indefinitely."

"I don't believe it. What happened on Mars will happen again on Earth
if you take over. After a while, slaves just don't care very strongly
about living."

"You wouldn't be slaves. You would be functional parts of the Quedak
Cooperation."

"Which would be run by you," Sorensen said. "Any way you slice it,
it's the same old pie."

"You don't know what you're talking about," the Quedak said. "We have
talked long enough. I am prepared to kill one man in the next five
minutes. Are you or are you not going to join me?" Sorensen looked at
Drake. Drake turned on the transmitter.

Gusts of rain splattered on the roof while the transmitter warmed up.
Drake lifted the microphone and tapped it, and was able to hear the
sound in the speaker.

"It's working," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

At that moment something flew against the netting-covered window. The
netting sagged; a fruit bat was entangled in it, glaring at them with
tiny red-rimmed eyes.

"Get some boards over that window!" Sorensen shouted.

As he spoke, a second bat hurtled into the netting, broke through it
and tumbled to the floor. The men clubbed it to death, but four more
bats flew in through the open window. Drake flailed at them, but he
couldn't drive them away from the transmitter. They were diving at his
eyes, and he was forced back. A wild blow caught one bat and knocked
it to the floor with a broken wing. Then the others had reached the
transmitter.

They pushed it off the table. Drake tried to catch the set, and failed.
He heard the glass tubes shattering, but by then he was busy protecting
his eyes.

In a few minutes they had killed two more bats, and the others had fled
out the window. The men nailed boards over both windows, and Drake bent
to examine the transmitter.

"Any chance of fixing it?" Sorensen asked.

"Not a hope," Drake said. "They ripped out the wiring while they were
at it."

"What do we do now?"

"I don't know."

Then the Quedak spoke to them over the walkie-talkie. "I must have your
answer right now."

Nobody said a word.

"In that case," the Quedak said, "I'm deeply sorry that one of you must
die now."


VII

Rain pelted the iron roof and the gusts of wind increased in intensity.
There were rumbles of distant thunder. But within the copra shed, the
air was hot and still. The gasoline lantern hanging from the center
beam threw a harsh yellow light that illuminated the center of the
room but left the corners in deep shadow. The treasure-hunters had
moved away from the walls. They were all in the center of the room
facing outward, and they made Drake think of a herd of buffalo drawn up
against a wolf they could smell but could not see.

Cable said, "Listen, maybe we should try this Quedak Cooperation. Maybe
it isn't so bad as--"

"Shut up," Drake said.

"Be reasonable," Cable argued. "It's better than dying, isn't it?"

"No one's dying yet," Drake said. "Just shut up and keep your eyes
open."

"I think I'm going to be sick," Cable said. "Dan, let me out."

"Be sick where you are," Drake said. "Just keep your eyes open."

"You can't give me orders," Cable said. He started toward the door.
Then he jumped back.

A yellowish scorpion had crept under the inch of clearance between the
door and the floor. Recetich stamped on it, smashing it to pulp under
his heavy boots. Then he whirled, swinging at three hornets which had
come at him through the boarded windows.

"Forget the hornets!" Drake shouted. "Keep watching the ground!"

There was movement on the floor. Several hairy spiders crawled out of
the shadows. Drake and Recetich beat at them with rifle butts. Byrnes
saw something crawling under the door. It looked like some kind of huge
flat centipede. He stamped at it, missed, and the centipede was on his
boot, past it, on the flesh of his leg. He screamed; it felt like a
ribbon of molten metal. He was able to smash it flat before he passed
out.

Drake checked the wound and decided it was not fatal. He stamped on
another spider, then felt Sorensen's hand clutching his shoulder. He
looked toward the corner Sorensen was pointing at.

Sliding toward them were two large, dark-coated snakes. Drake
recognized them as black adders. These normally shy creatures were
coming forward like tigers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The men panicked, trying to get away from the snakes. Drake pulled out
his revolver and dropped to one knee, ignoring the hornets that buzzed
around him, trying to draw a bead on the slender serpentine targets in
the swaying yellow light.

Thunder roared directly overhead. A long flash of lightning suddenly
flooded the room, spoiling his aim. Drake fired and missed, and waited
for the snakes to strike.

They didn't strike. They were moving away from him, retreating to the
rat hole from which they had emerged. One of the adders slid quickly
through. The other began to follow, then stopped, half in the hole.

Sorensen took careful aim with a rifle. Drake pushed the muzzle aside.
"Wait just a moment."

The adder hesitated. It came out of the hole and began to move toward
them again....

And there was another crash of thunder and a vivid splash of lightning.
The snake turned away and squirmed through the hole.

"What's going on?" Sorensen asked. "Is the thunder frightening them?"

"No, it's the lightning!" Drake said. "That's why the Quedak was in
such a rush. He saw that a storm was coming, and he hadn't consolidated
his position yet."

"What are you talking about?"

"The lightning," Drake said.

"The electrical storm! It's jamming that radio control of his! And when
he's jammed, the beasts revert to normal behavior. It takes him time to
re-establish control."

"The storm won't last forever," Cable said.

"But maybe it'll last long enough," Drake said. He picked up the
direction finders and handed one to Sorensen. "Come on, Bill. We'll
hunt out that bug right now."

"Hey," Recetich said, "isn't there something I can do?"

"You can start swimming if we don't come back in an hour," Drake said.

       *       *       *       *       *

In slanting lines the rain drove down, pushed by the wild southwest
wind. Thunder rolled continually and each flash of lightning seemed
aimed at them. Drake and Sorensen reached the edge of the jungle and
stopped.

"We'll separate here," Drake said. "Gives us a better chance of
converging on him."

"Right," Sorensen said. "Take care of yourself, Dan."

Sorensen plunged into the jungle. Drake trotted fifty yards down the
fringe and then entered the bush.

He pushed forward, the revolver in his belt, the radio direction
finder in one hand, a flashlight in the other. The jungle seemed to
be animated by a vicious life of its own, almost as if the Quedak
controlled it. Vines curled cunningly around his ankles and the bushes
reached out thorny hands toward him. Every branch took a special
delight in slapping his face.

Each time the lightning flashed, Drake's direction finder tried to
home on it. He was having a difficult time staying on course. But,
he reminded himself, the Quedak was undoubtedly having an even more
difficult time. Between flashes, he was able to set a course. The
further he penetrated into the jungle, the stronger the signal became.

After a while he noticed that the flashes of lightning were spaced
more widely apart. The storm was moving on toward the north, leaving
the island behind. How much longer would he have the protection of the
lightning? Another ten or fifteen minutes?

He heard something whimper. He swung his flashlight around and saw his
dog, Oro, coming toward him.

His dog--or the Quedak's dog?

"Hey there, boy," Drake said. He wondered if he should drop the
direction finder and get the revolver out of his belt. He wondered if
the revolver would still work after such a thorough soaking.

Oro came up and licked his hand. He was Drake's dog, at least for the
duration of the storm.

They moved on together, and the thunder rumbled distantly in the north.
The signal on his RDF was very strong now. Somewhere around here....

He saw light from another flashlight. Sorensen, badly out of breath,
had joined him. The jungle had ripped and clawed at him, but he still
had his rifle, flashlight and direction finder.

Oro was scratching furiously at a bush. There was a long flash of
lightning, and in it they saw the Quedak.

       *       *       *       *       *

Drake realized, in those final moments, that the rain had stopped. The
lightning had stopped, too. He dropped the direction finder. With the
flashlight in one hand and his revolver in the other, he tried to take
aim at the Quedak, who was moving, who had jumped--

To Sorensen's neck, just above the right collarbone.

Sorensen raised his hands, then lowered them again. He turned toward
Drake, raising his rifle. His face was perfectly calm. He looked as
though his only purpose in life was to kill Drake.

Drake fired from less than two feet away. Sorensen spun with the
impact, dropped his rifle and fell.

Drake bent over him, his revolver ready. He saw that he had fired
accurately. The bullet had gone in just above the right collarbone. It
was a bad wound. But it had been much worse for the Quedak, who had
been in the direct path of the bullet. All that was left of the Quedak
was a splatter of black across Sorensen's chest.

Drake applied hasty first aid and hoisted Sorensen to his shoulders. He
wondered what he would have done if the Quedak had been standing above
Sorensen's heart, or on his throat, or on his head.

He decided it was better not to think about that.

He started back to camp, with his dog trotting along beside him.Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction December 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                           One man's poison


                          By ROBERT SHECKLEY


                         Illustrated by EMSH


     They could eat a horse, only luckily there was none ... it
     might have eaten them first!

       *       *       *       *       *




Hellman plucked the last radish out of the can with a pair of
dividers. He held it up for Casker to admire, then laid it carefully
on the workbench beside the razor.

"Hell of a meal for two grown men," Casker said, flopping down in one
of the ship's padded crash chairs.

"If you'd like to give up your share--" Hellman started to suggest.

Casker shook his head quickly. Hellman smiled, picked up the razor and
examined its edge critically.

"Don't make a production out of it," Casker said, glancing at the
ship's instruments. They were approaching a red dwarf, the only
planet-bearing sun in the vicinity. "We want to be through with supper
before we get much closer."

Hellman made a practice incision in the radish, squinting along the
top of the razor. Casker bent closer, his mouth open. Hellman poised
the razor delicately and cut the radish cleanly in half.

"Will you say grace?" Hellman asked.

Casker growled something and popped a half in his mouth. Hellman
chewed more slowly. The sharp taste seemed to explode along his
disused tastebuds.

"Not much bulk value," Hellman said.

Casker didn't answer. He was busily studying the red dwarf.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he swallowed the last of his radish, Hellman stifled a sigh. Their
last meal had been three days ago ... if two biscuits and a cup of
water could be called a meal. This radish, now resting in the vast
emptiness of their stomachs, was the last gram of food on board ship.

"Two planets," Casker said. "One's burned to a crisp."

"Then we'll land on the other."

Casker nodded and punched a deceleration spiral into the ship's tape.

Hellman found himself wondering for the hundredth time where the fault
had been. Could he have made out the food requisitions wrong, when
they took on supplies at Calao station? After all, he had been
devoting most of his attention to the mining equipment. Or had the
ground crew just forgotten to load those last precious cases?

He drew his belt in to the fourth new notch he had punched.

Speculation was useless. Whatever the reason, they were in a jam.
Ironically enough, they had more than enough fuel to take them back to
Calao. But they would be a pair of singularly emaciated corpses by the
time the ship reached there.

"We're coming in now," Casker said.

And to make matters worse, this unexplored region of space had few
suns and fewer planets. Perhaps there was a slight possibility of
replenishing their water supply, but the odds were enormous against
finding anything they could eat.

"Look at that place," Casker growled.

Hellman shook himself out of his reverie.

The planet was like a round gray-brown porcupine. The spines of a
million needle-sharp mountains glittered in the red dwarf's feeble
light. And as they spiraled lower, circling the planet, the pointed
mountains seemed to stretch out to meet them.

"It can't be _all_ mountains," Hellman said.

"It's not."

Sure enough, there were oceans and lakes, out of which thrust jagged
island-mountains. But no sign of level land, no hint of civilization,
or even animal life.

"At least it's got an oxygen atmosphere," Casker said.

Their deceleration spiral swept them around the planet, cutting lower
into the atmosphere, braking against it. And still there was nothing
but mountains and lakes and oceans and more mountains.

On the eighth run, Hellman caught sight of a solitary building on a
mountain top. Casker braked recklessly, and the hull glowed red hot.
On the eleventh run, they made a landing approach.

"Stupid place to build," Casker muttered.

The building was doughnut-shaped, and fitted nicely over the top of
the mountain. There was a wide, level lip around it, which Casker
scorched as he landed the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the air, the building had merely seemed big. On the ground, it
was enormous. Hellman and Casker walked up to it slowly. Hellman had
his burner ready, but there was no sign of life.

"This planet must be abandoned," Hellman said almost in a whisper.

"Anyone in his right mind would abandon this place," Casker said.
"There're enough good planets around, without anyone trying to live on
a needle point."

They reached the door. Hellman tried to open it and found it locked.
He looked back at the spectacular display of mountains.

"You know," he said, "when this planet was still in a molten state, it
must have been affected by several gigantic moons that are now broken
up. The strains, external and internal, wrenched it into its present
spined appearance and--"

"Come off it," Casker said ungraciously. "You were a librarian before
you decided to get rich on uranium."

Hellman shrugged his shoulders and burned a hole in the doorlock. They
waited.

The only sound on the mountain top was the growling of their stomachs.

They entered.

The tremendous wedge-shaped room was evidently a warehouse of sorts.
Goods were piled to the ceiling, scattered over the floor, stacked
haphazardly against the walls. There were boxes and containers of all
sizes and shapes, some big enough to hold an elephant, others the size
of thimbles.

Near the door was a dusty pile of books. Immediately, Hellman bent
down to examine them.

"Must be food somewhere in here," Casker said, his face lighting up
for the first time in a week. He started to open the nearest box.

[Illustration]

"This is interesting," Hellman said, discarding all the books except
one.

"Let's eat first," Casker said, ripping the top off the box. Inside
was a brownish dust. Casker looked at it, sniffed, and made a face.

"Very interesting indeed," Hellman said, leafing through the book.

Casker opened a small can, which contained a glittering green slime.
He closed it and opened another. It contained a dull orange slime.

"Hmm," Hellman said, still reading.

"Hellman! Will you kindly drop that book and help me find some food?"

"Food?" Hellman repeated, looking up. "What makes you think there's
anything to eat here? For all you know, this could be a paint
factory."

"It's a warehouse!" Casker shouted.

He opened a kidney-shaped can and lifted out a soft purple stick. It
hardened quickly and crumpled to dust as he tried to smell it. He
scooped up a handful of the dust and brought it to his mouth.

"That might be extract of strychnine," Hellman said casually.

       *       *       *       *       *

Casker abruptly dropped the dust and wiped his hands.

"After all," Hellman pointed out, "granted that this is a warehouse--a
cache, if you wish--we don't know what the late inhabitants considered
good fare. Paris green salad, perhaps, with sulphuric acid as
dressing."

"All right," Casker said, "but we gotta eat. What're you going to do
about all this?" He gestured at the hundreds of boxes, cans and
bottles.

"The thing to do," Hellman said briskly, "is to make a qualitative
analysis on four or five samples. We could start out with a simple
titration, sublimate the chief ingredient, see if it forms a
precipitate, work out its molecular makeup from--"

"Hellman, you don't know what you're talking about. You're a
librarian, remember? And I'm a correspondence school pilot. We don't
know anything about titrations and sublimations."

"I know," Hellman said, "but we should. It's the right way to go about
it."

"Sure. In the meantime, though, just until a chemist drops in, what'll
we do?"

"This might help us," Hellman said, holding up the book. "Do you know
what it is?"

"No," Casker said, keeping a tight grip on his patience.

"It's a pocket dictionary and guide to the Helg language."

"Helg?"

"The planet we're on. The symbols match up with those on the boxes."

Casker raised an eyebrow. "Never heard of Helg."

"I don't believe the planet has ever had any contact with Earth,"
Hellman said. "This dictionary isn't Helg-English. It's
Helg-Aloombrigian."

Casker remembered that Aloombrigia was the home planet of a small,
adventurous reptilian race, out near the center of the Galaxy.

"How come you can read Aloombrigian?" Casker asked.

"Oh, being a librarian isn't a completely useless profession," Hellman
said modestly. "In my spare time--"

"Yeah. Now how about--"

"Do you know," Hellman said, "the Aloombrigians probably helped the
Helgans leave their planet and find another. They sell services like
that. In which case, this building very likely is a food cache!"

"Suppose you start translating," Casker suggested wearily, "and maybe
find us something to eat."

They opened boxes until they found a likely-looking substance.
Laboriously, Hellman translated the symbols on it.

"Got it," he said. "It reads:--'USE SNIFFNERS--THE BETTER ABRASIVE.'"

"Doesn't sound edible," Casker said.

"I'm afraid not."

They found another, which read: VIGROOM! FILL ALL YOUR STOMACHS, AND
FILL THEM RIGHT!

"What kind of animals do you suppose these Helgans were?" Casker
asked.

Hellman shrugged his shoulders.

The next label took almost fifteen minutes to translate. It read:
ARGOSEL MAKES YOUR THUDRA ALL TIZZY. CONTAINS THIRTY ARPS OF RAMSTAT
PULZ, FOR SHELL LUBRICATION.

"There must be _something_ here we can eat," Casker said with a note
of desperation.

"I hope so," Hellman replied.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the end of two hours, they were no closer. They had translated
dozens of titles and sniffed so many substances that their olfactory
senses had given up in disgust.

"Let's talk this over," Hellman said, sitting on a box marked:
VORMITISH--GOOD AS IT SOUNDS!

"Sure," Casker said, sprawling out on the floor. "Talk."

"If we could deduce what kind of creatures inhabited this planet, we'd
know what kind of food they ate, and whether it's likely to be edible
for us."

"All we do know is that they wrote a lot of lousy advertising copy."

Hellman ignored that. "What kind of intelligent beings would evolve on
a planet that is all mountains?"

"Stupid ones!" Casker said.

That was no help. But Hellman found that he couldn't draw any
inferences from the mountains. It didn't tell him if the late Helgans
ate silicates or proteins or iodine-base foods or anything.

"Now look," Hellman said, "we'll have to work this out by pure
logic--Are you listening to me?"

"Sure," Casker said.

"Okay. There's an old proverb that covers our situation perfectly:
'One man's meat is another man's poison.'"

"Yeah," Casker said. He was positive his stomach had shrunk to
approximately the size of a marble.

"We can assume, first, that their meat is our meat."

Casker wrenched himself away from a vision of five juicy roast beefs
dancing tantalizingly before him. "What if their meat is our _poison_?
What then?"

"Then," Hellman said, "we will assume that their poison is our meat."

"And what happens if their meat _and_ their poison are our poison?"

"We starve."

"All right," Casker said, standing up. "Which assumption do we start
with?"

"Well, there's no sense in asking for trouble. This _is_ an oxygen
planet, if that means anything. Let's assume that we can eat some
basic food of theirs. If we can't we'll start on their poisons."

"If we live that long," Casker said.

Hellman began to translate labels. They discarded such brands as
ANDROGYNITES' DELIGHT AND VERBELL--FOR LONGER, CURLIER, MORE SENSITIVE
ANTENNAE, until they found a small gray box, about six inches by three
by three. It was called VALKORIN'S UNIVERSAL TASTE TREAT, FOR ALL
DIGESTIVE CAPACITIES.

"This looks as good as any," Hellman said. He opened the box.

Casker leaned over and sniffed. "No odor."

       *       *       *       *       *

Within the box they found a rectangular, rubbery red block. It
quivered slightly, like jelly.

"Bite into it," Casker said.

"Me?" Hellman asked. "Why not you?"

"You picked it."

"I prefer just looking at it," Hellman said with dignity. "I'm not too
hungry."

"I'm not either," Casker said.

They sat on the floor and stared at the jellylike block. After ten
minutes, Hellman yawned, leaned back and closed his eyes.

"All right, coward," Casker said bitterly. "I'll try it. Just
remember, though, if I'm poisoned, you'll never get off this planet.
You don't know how to pilot."

"Just take a little bite, then," Hellman advised.

Casker leaned over and stared at the block. Then he prodded it with
his thumb.

The rubbery red block giggled.

"Did you hear that?" Casker yelped, leaping back.

"I didn't hear anything," Hellman said, his hands shaking. "Go ahead."

Casker prodded the block again. It giggled louder, this time with a
disgusting little simper.

"Okay," Casker said, "what do we try next?"

"Next? What's wrong with this?"

"I don't eat anything that giggles," Casker stated firmly.

"Now listen to me," Hellman said. "The creatures who manufactured this
might have been trying to create an esthetic sound as well as a
pleasant shape and color. That giggle is probably only for the
amusement of the eater."

"Then bite into it yourself," Casker offered.

Hellman glared at him, but made no move toward the rubbery block.
Finally he said, "Let's move it out of the way."

They pushed the block over to a corner. It lay there giggling softly
to itself.

"Now what?" Casker said.

Hellman looked around at the jumbled stacks of incomprehensible alien
goods. He noticed a door on either side of the room.

"Let's have a look in the other sections," he suggested.

Casker shrugged his shoulders apathetically.

Slowly they trudged to the door in the left wall. It was locked and
Hellman burned it open with the ship's burner.

It was a wedge-shaped room, piled with incomprehensible alien goods.

The hike back across the room seemed like miles, but they made it only
slightly out of wind. Hellman blew out the lock and they looked in.

It was a wedge-shaped room, piled with incomprehensible alien goods.

"All the same," Casker said sadly, and closed the door.

"Evidently there's a series of these rooms going completely around the
building," Hellman said. "I wonder if we should explore them."

Casker calculated the distance around the building, compared it with
his remaining strength, and sat down heavily on a long gray object.

"Why bother?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hellman tried to collect his thoughts. Certainly he should be able to
find a key of some sort, a clue that would tell him what they could
eat. But where was it?

He examined the object Casker was sitting on. It was about the size
and shape of a large coffin, with a shallow depression on top. It was
made of a hard, corrugated substance.

"What do you suppose this is?" Hellman asked.

"Does it matter?"

Hellman glanced at the symbols painted on the side of the object, then
looked them up in his dictionary.

"Fascinating," he murmured, after a while.

"Is it something to eat?" Casker asked, with a faint glimmering of
hope.

"No, You are sitting on something called THE MOROG CUSTOM SUPER
TRANSPORT FOR THE DISCRIMINATING HELGAN WHO DESIRES THE BEST IN
VERTICAL TRANSPORTATION. It's a vehicle!"

"Oh," Casker said dully.

"This is important! Look at it! How does it work?"

Casker wearily climbed off the Morog Custom Super Transport and looked
it over carefully. He traced four almost invisible separations on its
four corners. "Retractable wheels, probably, but I don't see--"

Hellman read on. "It says to give it three amphus of high-gain Integor
fuel, then a van of Tonder lubrication, and not to run it over three
thousand Ruls for the first fifty mungus."

"Let's find something to eat," Casker said.

"Don't you see how important this is?" Hellman asked. "This could
solve our problem. If we could deduce the alien logic inherent in
constructing this vehicle, we might know the Helgan thought pattern.
This, in turn, would give us an insight into their nervous systems,
which would imply their biochemical makeup."

Casker stood still, trying to decide whether he had enough strength
left to strangle Hellman.

"For example," Hellman said, "what kind of vehicle would be used in a
place like this? Not one with wheels, since everything is up and down.
Anti-gravity? Perhaps, but what _kind_ of anti-gravity? And why did
the inhabitants devise a boxlike form instead--"

Casker decided sadly that he didn't have enough strength to strangle
Hellman, no matter how pleasant it might be. Very quietly, he said,
"Kindly stop making like a scientist. Let's see if there isn't
_something_ we can gulp down."

"All right," Hellman said sulkily.

       *       *       *       *       *

Casker watched his partner wander off among the cans, bottles and
cases. He wondered vaguely where Hellman got the energy, and decided
that he was just too cerebral to know when he was starving.

"Here's something," Hellman called out, standing in front of a large
yellow vat.

"What does it say?" Casker asked.

"Little bit hard to translate. But rendered freely, it reads:
MORISHILLE'S VOOZY, WITH LACTO-ECTO ADDED FOR A NEW TASTE SENSATION.
EVERYONE DRINKS VOOZY. GOOD BEFORE AND AFTER MEALS, NO UNPLEASANT
AFTER-EFFECTS. GOOD FOR CHILDREN! THE DRINK OF THE UNIVERSE!"

"That sounds good," Casker admitted, thinking that Hellman might not
be so stupid after all.

"This should tell us once and for all if their meat _is_ our meat,"
Hellman said. "This Voozy seems to be the closest thing to a universal
drink I've found yet."

"Maybe," Casker said hopefully, "maybe it's just plain water!"

"We'll see." Hellman pried open the lid with the edge of the burner.

Within the vat was a crystal-clear liquid.

"No odor," Casker said, bending over the vat.

The crystal liquid lifted to meet him.

Casker retreated so rapidly that he fell over a box. Hellman helped
him to his feet, and they approached the vat again. As they came near,
the liquid lifted itself three feet into the air and moved toward
them.

"What've you done now?" Casker asked, moving back carefully. The
liquid flowed slowly over the side of the vat. It began to flow toward
him.

"Hellman!" Casker shrieked.

Hellman was standing to one side, perspiration pouring down his face,
reading his dictionary with a preoccupied frown.

"Guess I bumbled the translation," he said.

"Do something!" Casker shouted. The liquid was trying to back him into
a corner.

"Nothing I can do," Hellman said, reading on. "Ah, here's the error.
It doesn't say 'Everyone drinks Voozy.' Wrong subject. 'Voozy drinks
_everyone_.' That tells us something! The Helgans must have soaked
liquid in through their pores. Naturally, they would prefer to be
drunk, instead of to drink."

Casker tried to dodge around the liquid, but it cut him off with a
merry gurgle. Desperately he picked up a small bale and threw it at
the Voozy. The Voozy caught the bale and drank it. Then it discarded
that and turned back to Casker.

Hellman tossed another box. The Voozy drank this one and a third and
fourth that Casker threw in. Then, apparently exhausted, it flowed
back into its vat.

Casker clapped down the lid and sat on it, trembling violently.

"Not so good," Hellman said. "We've been taking it for granted that
the Helgans had eating habits like us. But, of course, it doesn't
necessarily--"

"No, it doesn't. No, sir, it certainly doesn't. I guess we can see
that it doesn't. Anyone can see that it doesn't--"

"Stop that," Hellman ordered sternly. "We've no time for hysteria."

"Sorry." Casker slowly moved away from the Voozy vat.

"I guess we'll have to assume that their meat is our poison," Hellman
said thoughtfully. "So now we'll see if their poison is our meat."

Casker didn't say anything. He was wondering what would have happened
if the Voozy had drunk him.

In the corner, the rubbery block was still giggling to itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now here's a likely-looking poison," Hellman said, half an hour
later.

Casker had recovered completely, except for an occasional twitch of
the lips.

"What does it say?" he asked.

Hellman rolled a tiny tube in the palm of his hand. "It's called
Pvastkin's Plugger. The label reads: WARNING! HIGHLY DANGEROUS!
PVASTKIN'S PLUGGER IS DESIGNED TO FILL HOLES OR CRACKS OF NOT MORE
THAN TWO CUBIC VIMS. HOWEVER--THE PLUGGER IS NOT TO BE EATEN UNDER ANY
CIRCUMSTANCES. THE ACTIVE INGREDIENT, RAMOTOL, WHICH MAKES PVASTKIN'S
SO EXCELLENT A PLUGGER RENDERS IT HIGHLY DANGEROUS WHEN TAKEN
INTERNALLY."

"Sounds great," Casker said. "It'll probably blow us sky-high."

"Do you have any other suggestions?" Hellman asked.

Casker thought for a moment. The food of Helg was obviously
unpalatable for humans. So perhaps was their poison ... but wasn't
starvation better than this sort of thing?

After a moment's communion with his stomach, he decided that
starvation was _not_ better.

"Go ahead," he said.

Hellman slipped the burner under his arm and unscrewed the top of the
little bottle. He shook it.

Nothing happened.

"It's got a seal," Casker pointed out.

Hellman punctured the seal with his fingernail and set the bottle on
the floor. An evil-smelling green froth began to bubble out.

Hellman looked dubiously at the froth. It was congealing into a glob
and spreading over the floor.

"Yeast, perhaps," he said, gripping the burner tightly.

"Come, come. Faint heart never filled an empty stomach."

"I'm not holding _you_ back," Hellman said.

The glob swelled to the size of a man's head.

"How long is that supposed to go on?" Casker asked.

"Well," Hellman said, "it's advertised as a Plugger. I suppose that's
what it does--expands to plug up holes."

"Sure. But how _much_?"

"Unfortunately, I don't know how much two cubic vims are. But it can't
go on much--"

Belatedly, they noticed that the Plugger had filled almost a quarter
of the room and was showing no signs of stopping.

"We should have believed the label!" Casker yelled to him, across the
spreading glob. "It _is_ dangerous!"

As the Plugger produced more surface, it began to accelerate in its
growth. A sticky edge touched Hellman, and he jumped back.

"Watch out!"

He couldn't reach Casker, on the other side of the gigantic sphere of
blob. Hellman tried to run around, but the Plugger had spread, cutting
the room in half. It began to swell toward the walls.

"Run for it!" Hellman yelled, and rushed to the door behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

He flung it open just as the expanding glob reached him. On the other
side of the room, he heard a door slam shut. Hellman didn't wait any
longer. He sprinted through and slammed the door behind him.

He stood for a moment, panting, the burner in his hand. He hadn't
realized how weak he was. That sprint had cut his reserves of energy
dangerously close to the collapsing point. At least Casker had made
it, too, though.

But he was still in trouble.

The Plugger poured merrily through the blasted lock, into the room.
Hellman tried a practice shot on it, but the Plugger was evidently
impervious ... as, he realized, a good plugger should be.

It was showing no signs of fatigue.

Hellman hurried to the far wall. The door was locked, as the others
had been, so he burned out the lock and went through.

How far could the glob expand? How much was two cubic vims? Two cubic
miles, perhaps? For all he knew, the Plugger was used to repair faults
in the crusts of planets.

In the next room, Hellman stopped to catch his breath. He remembered
that the building was circular. He would burn his way through the
remaining doors and join Casker. They would burn their way outside
and....

Casker didn't have a burner!

Hellman turned white with shock. Casker had made it into the room on
the right, because they had burned it open earlier. The Plugger was
undoubtedly oozing into that room, through the shattered lock ... and
Casker couldn't get out! The Plugger was on his left, a locked door on
his right!

Rallying his remaining strength, Hellman began to run. Boxes seemed to
get in his way purposefully, tripping him, slowing him down. He
blasted the next door and hurried on to the next. And the next. And
the next.

The Plugger couldn't expand _completely_ into Casker's room!

Or could it?

The wedge-shaped rooms, each a segment of a circle, seemed to stretch
before him forever, a jumbled montage of locked doors, alien goods,
more doors, more goods. Hellman fell over a crate, got to his feet and
fell again. He had reached the limit of his strength, and passed it.
But Casker was his friend.

Besides, without a pilot, he'd never get off the place.

Hellman struggled through two more rooms on trembling legs and then
collapsed in front of a third.

"Is that you, Hellman?" he heard Casker ask, from the other side of
the door.

"You all right?" Hellman managed to gasp.

"Haven't much room in here," Casker said, "but the Plugger's stopped
growing. Hellman, get me out of here!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Hellman lay on the floor panting. "Moment," he said.

"Moment, hell!" Casker shouted. "Get me out. I've found water!"

"What? How?"

"Get me out of here!"

Hellman tried to stand up, but his legs weren't cooperating. "What
happened?" he asked.

"When I saw that glob filling the room, I figured I'd try to start up
the Super Custom Transport. Thought maybe it could knock down the door
and get me out. So I pumped it full of high-gain Integor fuel."

"Yes?" Hellman said, still trying to get his legs under control.

"That Super Custom Transport is an animal, Hellman! And the Integor
fuel is water! Now get me out!"

Hellman lay back with a contented sigh. If he had had a little more
time, he would have worked out the whole thing himself, by pure logic.
But it was all very apparent now. The most efficient machine to go
over those vertical, razor-sharp mountains would be an animal,
probably with retractable suckers. It was kept in hibernation between
trips; and if it drank water, the other products designed for it would
be palatable, too. Of course they still didn't know much about the
late inhabitants, but undoubtedly....

"Burn down that door!" Casker shrieked, his voice breaking.

Hellman was pondering the irony of it all. If one man's meat--_and_
his poison--are your poison, then try eating something else. So
simple, really.

But there was one thing that still bothered him.

"How did you know it was an Earth-type animal?" he asked.

"Its breath, stupid! It inhales and exhales and smells as if it's
eaten onions!" There was a sound of cans falling and bottles
shattering. "Now hurry!"

"What's wrong?" Hellman asked, finally getting to his feet and poising
the burner.

"The Custom Super Transport. It's got me cornered behind a pile of
cases. Hellman, it seems to think that I'm _its_ meat!"

Broiled with the burner--well done for Hellman, medium rare for
Casker--it was their meat, with enough left over for the trip back to
Calao.

                                                       --ROBERT SHECKLEY

       *       *       *       *       *Proof of the Pudding

                          By ROBERT SHECKLEY

                         Illustrated by WILLER

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                  Galaxy Science Fiction August 1952.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




             One man's fact is fantasy for another--except
              the man whose fantasies become solid facts!


His arms were very tired, but he lifted the chisel and mallet again. He
was almost through; only a few more letters and the inscription, cut
deeply into the tough granite, would be finished. He rounded out the
last period and straightened up, dropping his tools carelessly to the
floor of the cave. Proudly he wiped the perspiration from his dirty
stubbled face and read what he had written.

     I ROSE FROM THE SLIME OF THE PLANET. NAKED AND DEFENSELESS,
     I FASHIONED TOOLS. I BUILT AND DEMOLISHED, CREATED AND DESTROYED.
     I  CREATED A THING GREATER THAN MYSELF THAT DESTROYED ME.

     MY NAME IS MAN AND THIS IS MY LAST WORK.

He smiled. What he had written was good. Not literary enough, perhaps,
but a fitting tribute to the human race, written by the last man. He
glanced at the tools at his feet. Having no further use for them, he
dissolved them, and, hungry from his long work, squatted in the rubble
of the cave and created a dinner. He stared at the food for a moment,
wondering what was lacking; then, sheepishly, created a table and
chair, utensils and plates. He was embarrassed. He had forgotten them
again.

Although there was no need to rush, he ate hurriedly, noting the odd
fact that when he didn't think of anything specific, he always created
hamburger, mashed potatoes, peas, bread and ice cream. Habit, he
decided. Finished, he made the remnants of the meal disappear, and with
them the plates, utensils and table. The chair he retained. Sitting on
it, he stared thoughtfully at the inscription. _It's fine_, he thought,
_but no human other than myself will ever read it._

It was fairly certain that he was the last man alive on the Earth. The
war had been thorough. Thorough as only man, a meticulous animal, could
make it. There had been no neutrals in this war, no middle-of-the-road
policy. You were on one side or the other. Bacteria, gas and radiations
had covered the Earth like a vast cloud. In the first days of that
war, invincible secret weapon had succeeded secret weapon with almost
monotonous regularity. And after the last hand had pushed the last
button, the bombs, automatically guided and impelled, had continued
to rain down. The unhappy Earth was a huge junkyard, without a living
thing, plant or animal, from pole to pole.

He had watched a good part of it. He had waited until he was fairly
sure the last bomb had been dropped; then he had come down.

_Very clever of you_, he thought bitterly, looking out the mouth of the
cave at the lava plain his ship rested on, and at the twisted mountains
behind it.

_You're a traitor--but who cares?_

He had been a captain in the Western Hemisphere Defense. Within two
days of warfare, he had known what the end would be. Filling a cruiser
with canned air, food and water, he had fled. In the confusion and
destruction, he knew that he would never be missed; after a few days
there was no one left to miss him. He had raced the big ship to the
dark side of the Moon, and waited. It was a twelve-day war--he had
guessed it would last fourteen--but he had to wait nearly six months
before the automatic missiles stopped falling. Then he had come down.

To find himself the only survivor....

       *       *       *       *       *

He had expected others to recognize the futility of it, load ships
and flock to the dark side of the Moon also. Evidently there had been
no time, even if there had been the desire. He had thought that there
would be scattered groups of survivors, but he hadn't found any. The
war had been too thorough.

Landing on the Earth should have killed him, for the air itself was
poisoned. He hadn't cared--and he had lived. He seemed to be immune to
the various kinds of germs and radiations, or perhaps that was part of
his new power. He certainly had encountered enough of both, skipping
around the world in his ship, from the ruins of one city to another,
across blasted valleys and plains, scorched mountains. He had found no
life, but he did discover something.

He could create. He realized the power on his third day on Earth.
Wistfully, he had wished for a tree in the midst of the melted rock
and metal; a tree had appeared. The rest of the day he experimented,
and found that he could create anything that he had ever seen or heard
about.

Things he knew best, he could create best. Things he knew just from
books or conversation--palaces, for example--tended to be lopsided
and uncertain, although he could make them nearly perfect by laboring
mentally over the details. Everything he created was three-dimensional.
Even food tasted like food and seemed to nourish him. He could forget
all about one of his creations, go to sleep, and it would still be
there when he awakened. He could also uncreate. A single concentrated
thought and the thing he had made would vanish. The larger the thing,
the longer it took to uncreate.

Things he _hadn't_ made--valleys and mountains--he could uncreate, too,
but it took longer. It seemed as though matter was easier to handle
once he had shaped it. He could make birds and small animals, or things
that looked like birds and small animals.

He had never tried to make a human being.

He wasn't a scientist; he had been a space-pilot. He had a vague
concept of atomic theory and practically no idea of genetics. He
thought that some change must have taken place in his germ-plasm, or
in his brain, or perhaps in the Earth. The "why" of it all didn't
especially bother him. It was a fact and he accepted it.

He stared at the monument again. Something about it bothered him.

Of course, he could have created it, but he didn't know if the things
he made would endure after his death. They seemed stable enough, but
they might dissolve with his own dissolution. Therefore he compromised.
He created a chisel and mallet, but selected a granite wall that he
hadn't made. He cut the letters into the inside of the wall of the
cave so they would be safe from the elements, working many hours at a
stretch, sleeping and eating beside the wall.

From the mouth of the cave, he could see his ship, perched on a level
plain of scorched ground. He was in no rush to get back to it. In six
days the inscription was done, cut deeply and eternally into the rock.

The thought that had been bothering him as he stared at the gray
granite finally came to the surface. The only people who would come
to read it would be visitors from the stars. How would they decipher
it? He stared at the inscription angrily. He should have written it in
symbols. But what kind of symbols? Mathematics? Of course, but what
would that tell them about Man? And what made him think _they_ would
discover the cave anyway? There was no use for an inscription when
Man's entire history was written over the face of the planet, scorched
into the crust for anyone to see. He cursed his stupidity for wasting
six days working at the useless inscription. He was about to uncreate
it when he turned his head, hearing footsteps at the mouth of the cave.

He almost fell off the chair getting to his feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

A girl was standing there. He blinked rapidly, and she was still there,
a tall, dark-haired girl dressed in a torn, dirty one-piece coverall.

"Hi," she said, and walked into the cave. "I heard your hammer from the
valley."

Automatically, he offered her his chair and created another for
himself. She tested it gingerly before she sat down.

"I saw you do it," she said, "but I still don't believe it. Mirrors?"

"No," he muttered uncertainly. "I create. That is, I have the power
to--wait a minute! How did you get here?" While he was demanding to
know, he was considering and rejecting possibilities. Hidden in a cave?
On a mountain top? No, there would be only one possible way....

"I was in your ship, pal." She leaned back in the chair and clasped her
hands around one knee. "When you loaded up that cruiser, I figured you
were going to beat it. I was getting tired of setting fuses eighteen
hours a day, so I stowed away. Anybody else alive?"

"No. Why didn't I see you, then?" He stared at the ragged, beautiful
girl, and a vague thought crossed his mind. He reached out and touched
her arm. She didn't draw back, but her pretty face grew annoyed.

"I'm real," she said bluntly. "You must have seen me at the base.
Remember?"

He tried to think back to the time when there had been a
base--centuries ago, it seemed. There _had_ been a dark-haired girl
there, one who had never given him a tumble.

"I think I froze to death," she was saying. "Or into coma, anyhow, a
few hours after your ship took off. Lousy heating system you have in
that crate!" She shivered reminiscently.

"Would have used up too much oxygen," he explained. "Just kept the
pilot's compartment heated and aired. Used a suit to drag supplies
forward when I needed them."

"I'm glad you didn't see me," she laughed. "I must have looked like the
devil, all covered with frost and killed, I bet. Some sleeping beauty I
probably made! Well, I froze. When you opened all the compartments, I
revived. That's the whole story. Guess it took a few days. How come you
didn't see me?"

"I suppose I never looked back there," he admitted. "Quick enough,
I found I didn't need supplies. Funny, I thought I opened all the
compartments, but I don't really remember--"

She looked at the inscription on the wall. "What's that?"

"I thought I'd leave a sort of monument--"

"Who's going to read it?" she asked practically.

"No one, probably. It was just a foolish idea." He concentrated on it.
In a few moments the granite wall was bare. "I still don't understand
how you could be alive now," he said puzzled.

"But I am. I don't see how you do that--" she gestured at the chair and
wall--"But I'll accept the fact that you can. Why don't you accept the
fact that I'm alive?"

"Don't get me wrong," the man said. "I want company very much,
especially female company. It's just--Turn your back."

She complied, with a questioning look. Quickly he destroyed the stubble
on his face and created a clean pair of pressed pants and a shirt.
Stepping out of his tattered uniform, he put on the new clothes,
destroyed the rags, and, on an afterthought, created a comb and
straightened his tangled brown hair.

"All right," he said. "You can turn back now."

"Not bad," she smiled, looking him over. "Let me use that comb--and
would you please make me a dress? Size twelve, but see that the weight
goes in the right places."

       *       *       *       *       *

On the third attempt he had the thing right--he had never realized how
deceptive the shapes of women could be--and then he made a pair of gold
sandals with high heels for her.

"A little tight," she said, putting them on, "and not too practical
without sidewalks. But thanks much. This trick of yours really solves
the Christmas present problem, doesn't it?" Her dark hair was shiny in
the noon sun, and she looked very lovely and warm and human.

"See if _you_ can create," he urged, anxious to share his startling new
ability with her.

"I've already tried," she said. "No go. Still a man's world."

He frowned. "How can I be absolutely sure you're real?"

"That again? Do you remember creating me, Master?" she asked mockingly,
bending to loosen the strap on one shoe.

"I had been thinking--about women," he said grimly. "I might have
created you while I was asleep. Why shouldn't my subconscious mind
have as much power as my conscious mind? I would have equipped you
with a memory, given you a background. You would have been extremely
plausible. And if my subconscious mind _did_ create you, then it would
make certain that my conscious mind would never know."

"You're ridiculous!"

"Because if my conscious mind knew," he went on relentlessly, "it
would reject your existence. Your entire function, as a creation of my
subconscious, would be to keep me from knowing. To prove, by any means
in your power, by any logic, that you were--"

"Let's see you make a woman, then, if your mind is so good!" She
crossed her arms and leaned back in the chair, giving a single sharp
nod.

"All right." He stared at the cave wall and a woman started to appear.
It took shape sloppily, one arm too short, legs too long. Concentrating
harder, he was able to make its proportions fairly true. But its eyes
were set at an odd angle; its shoulders and back were sloped and
twisted. He had created a shell without brains or internal organs,
an automaton. He commanded it to speak, but only gulps came from the
shapeless mouth; he hadn't given it any vocal apparatus. Shuddering,
he destroyed the nightmare figure.

"I'm not a sculptor," he said. "Nor am I God."

"I'm glad you finally realize that."

"That still doesn't prove," he continued stubbornly, "that _you're_
real. I don't know what my subconscious mind is capable of."

"Make something for me," she said abruptly. "I'm tired of listening to
this nonsense."

_I've hurt her feelings_, he thought. _The only other human on Earth
and I've hurt her._ He nodded, took her by the hand and led her
out of the cave. On the flat plain below he created a city. He had
experimented with it a few days back, and it was much easier this time.
Patterned after pictures and childhood dreams of the Thousand and One
Nights, it towered black and white and rose. The walls were gleaming
ruby, and the gates were of silver-stained ebony. The towers were red
gold, and sapphires glittered in them. A great staircase of milky
ivory climbed to the highest opal spire, set with thousands of steps
of veined marble. There were lagoons of blue water, and little birds
fluttered above them, and silver and gold fish darted through the still
depths.

They walked through the city, and he created roses for her, white and
yellow and red, and gardens of strange blossoms. Between two domed
and spired buildings he created a vast pool of water; on it he put a
purple-canopied pleasure barge, loading it with every kind of food and
drink he could remember.

       *       *       *       *       *

They floated across the lagoon, fanned by the soft breeze he had
created.

"And all this is false," he reminded her after a little while.

She smiled. "No it's not. You can touch it. It's real."

"Will it be here after I die?"

"Who cares? Besides, if you can do all this, you can cure any sickness.
Perhaps you can even cure old age and death." She plucked a blossom
from an over-hanging bough and sniffed its fragrance. "You could keep
this from fading and dying. You could probably do the same for us, so
where's the problem?"

"Would you like to go away?" he said, puffing on a newly created
cigarette. "Would you like to find a new planet, untouched by war?
Would you like to start over?"

"Start over? You mean.... Later perhaps. Now I don't even want to go
near the ship. It reminds me of the war."

They floated on a little way.

"Are you sure now that I'm real?" she asked.

"If you want me to be honest, no," he replied. "But I want very much to
believe it."

"Then listen to me," she said, leaning toward him. "I'm real." She
slipped her arms around his neck. "I've always been real. I always will
be real. You want proof? Well, I know I'm real. So do you. What more
can you ask?"

He stared at her for a long moment, felt her warm arms around his neck,
listened to her breathing. He could smell the fragrance of her skin and
hair, the unique essence of an individual.

Slowly he said, "I believe you. I love you. What--what is your name?"

She thought for a moment. "Joan."

"Strange," he said. "I always dreamed of a girl named Joan. What's your
last name?"

She kissed him.

Overhead, the swallows he had created--_his_ swallows--wheeled in wide
circles above the lagoon, his fish darted aimlessly to and fro, and his
city stretched, proud and beautiful, to the edge of the twisted lava
mountains.

"You didn't tell me your last name," he said.

"Oh, that. A girl's maiden name never matters--she always takes her
husband's."

"That's an evasion!"

She smiled. "It is, isn't it?"PROSPECTOR'S SPECIAL

                          By ROBERT SHECKLEY

                         Illustrated by DILLON

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Science Fiction December 1959.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




              Lost in the vast Scorpion Desert of Venus,
            he needed all the courage a man could own--and
                  every bit of credit he could raise!


The sandcar moved smoothly over the rolling dunes, its six fat wheels
rising and falling like the ponderous rumps of tandem elephants. The
hidden sun beat down from a dead-white sky, pouring heat into the
canvas top, reflecting heat back from the parched sand.

"Stay awake," Morrison told himself, pulling the sandcar back to its
compass course.

It was his twenty-first day on Venus's Scorpion Desert, his
twenty-first day of fighting sleep while the sandcar rocked across the
dunes, forging over humpbacked little waves. Night travel would have
been easier, but there were too many steep ravines to avoid, too many
house-sized boulders to dodge. Now he knew why men went into the desert
in teams; one man drove while the other kept shaking him awake.

"But it's better alone," Morrison reminded himself. "Half the supplies
and no accidental murders."

His head was beginning to droop; he snapped himself erect. In front
of him, the landscape shimmered and danced through the polaroid
windshield. The sandcar lurched and rocked with treacherous gentleness.
Morrison rubbed his eyes and turned on the radio.

He was a big, sunburned, rangy young man with close-cropped black hair
and gray eyes. He had come to Venus with a grubstake of twenty thousand
dollars, to find his fortune in the Scorpion Desert as others had done
before him. He had outfitted in Presto, the last town on the edge
of the wilderness, and spent all but ten dollars on the sandcar and
equipment.

In Presto, ten dollars just covered the cost of a drink in the town's
only saloon. So Morrison ordered rye and water, drank with the miners
and prospectors, and laughed at the oldtimers' yarns about the sandwolf
packs and the squadrons of voracious birds that inhabited the interior
desert. He knew all about sunblindness, heat-stroke and telephone
breakdown. He was sure none of it would happen to him.

But now, after twenty-one days and eighteen hundred miles, he had
learned respect for this waterless waste of sand and stone three times
the area of the Sahara. You really _could_ die here!

But you could also get rich, and that was what Morrison planned to do.

       *       *       *       *       *

His radio hummed. At full volume, he could hear the faintest murmur of
dance music from Venusborg. Then it faded and only the hum was left.

He turned off the radio and gripped the steering wheel tightly in both
hands. He unclenched one hand and looked at his watch. Nine-fifteen
in the morning. At ten-thirty he would stop and take a nap. A man had
to have rest in this heat. But only a half-hour nap. Treasure lay
somewhere ahead of him, and he wanted to find it before his supplies
got much lower.

The precious outcroppings of goldenstone _had_ to be up ahead! He'd
been following traces for two days now. Maybe he would hit a real
bonanza, as Kirk did in '89, or Edmonson and Arsler in '93. If so, he
would do just what they did. He'd order up a Prospector's Special, and
to hell with the cost.

The sandcar rolled along at an even thirty miles an hour, and Morrison
tried to concentrate on the heat-blasted yellow-brown landscape. That
sandstone patch over there was just the tawny color of Janie's hair.

After he struck it rich, he and Janie would get married, and he'd go
back to Earth and buy an ocean farm. No more prospecting. Just one rich
strike so he could buy his spread on the deep blue Atlantic. Maybe some
people thought fish-herding was tame; it was good enough for him.

He could see it now, the mackerel herds drifting along and browsing at
the plankton pens, himself and his trusty dolphin keeping an eye out
for the silvery flash of a predatory barracuda or a steel-gray shark
coming along behind the branching coral....

Morrison felt the sandcar lurch. He woke up, grabbed the steering wheel
and turned it hard. During his moments of sleep, the vehicle had crept
over the dune's crumbling edge. Sand and pebbles spun under the fat
tires as the sandcar fought for traction. The car tilted perilously.
The tires shrieked against the sand, gripped, and started to pull the
vehicle back up the slope.

Then the whole face of the dune collapsed.

Morrison held onto the steering wheel as the sandcar flipped over on
its side and rolled down the slope. Sand filled his mouth and eyes.
He spat and held on while the car rolled over again and dropped into
emptiness.

For seconds, he was in the air. The sandcar hit bottom squarely on its
wheels. Morrison heard a double boom as the two rear tires blew out.
Then his head hit the windshield.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he recovered consciousness, the first thing he did was look at his
watch. It read 10:35.

"Time for that nap," Morrison said to himself. "But I guess I'll survey
the situation first."

He found that he was at the bottom of a shallow fault strewn with
knife-edged pebbles. Two tires had blown on impact, his windshield was
gone, and one of the doors was sprung. His equipment was strewn around,
but appeared to be intact.

"Could have been worse," Morrison said.

He bent down to examine the tires more carefully.

"It _is_ worse," he said.

The two blown tires were shredded beyond repair. There wasn't enough
rubber left in them to make a child's balloon. He had used up his
spares ten days back crossing Devil's Grill. Used them and discarded
them. He couldn't go on without tires.

Morrison unpacked his telephone. He wiped dust from its black
plastic face, then dialed Al's Garage in Presto. After a moment, the
small video screen lighted up. He could see a man's long, mournful,
grease-stained face.

"Al's Garage. Eddie speaking."

"Hi, Eddie. This is Tom Morrison. I bought that GM sandcar from you
about a month ago. Remember?"

"Sure I remember you," Eddie said. "You're the guy doing a single into
the Southwest Track. How's the bus holding out?"

"Fine. Great little car. Reason I called--"

"Hey," Eddie said, "what happened to your face?"

Morrison put his hand to his forehead and felt blood. "Nothing much,"
he said. "I went over a dune and blew out two tires."

He turned the telephone so that Eddie could see the tires.

"Unrepairable," said Eddie.

"I thought so. And I used up all my spares crossing Devil's Grill.
Look, Eddie, I'd like you to 'port me a couple of tires. Retreads are
fine. I can't move the sandcar without them."

"Sure," Eddie said, "except I haven't any retreads. I'll have to 'port
you new ones at five hundred apiece. Plus four hundred dollars 'porting
charges. Fourteen hundred dollars, Mr. Morrison."

"All right."

"Yes, sir. Now if you'll show me the cash, or a money order which you
can send back with the receipt, I'll get moving on it."

"At the moment," Morrison said, "I haven't got a cent on me."

"Bank account?"

"Stripped clean."

"Bonds? Property? Anything you can convert into cash?"

"Nothing except this sandcar, which you sold me for eight thousand
dollars. When I come back, I'll settle my bill with the sandcar."

"_If_ you get back. Sorry, Mr. Morrison. No can do."

"What do you mean?" Morrison asked. "You know I'll pay for the tires."

"And you know the rules on Venus," Eddie said, his mournful face set in
obstinate lines. "No credit! Cash and carry!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I can't run the sandcar without tires," Morrison said. "Are you going
to strand me out here?"

"Who in hell is stranding you?" Eddie asked. "This sort of thing
happens to prospectors every day. You know what you have to do now, Mr.
Morrison. Call Public Utility and declare yourself a bankrupt. Sign
over what's left of the sandcar, equipment, and anything you've found
on the way. They'll get you out."

"I'm not turning back," Morrison said. "Look!" He held the telephone
close to the ground. "You see the traces, Eddie? See those red and
purple flecks? There's precious stuff near here!"

"Every prospector sees traces," Eddie said. "Damned desert is full of
traces."

"These are rich," Morrison said. "These are leading straight to big
stuff, a bonanza lode. Eddie, I know it's a lot to ask, but if you
could stake me to a couple of tires--"

"I can't do it," Eddie said. "I just work here. I can't 'port you any
tires, not unless you show me money first. Otherwise I get fired and
probably jailed. You know the law."

"Cash and carry," Morrison said bleakly.

"Right. Be smart and turn back now. Maybe you can try again some other
time."

"I spent twelve years getting this stake together," Morrison said. "I'm
not going back."

He turned off the telephone and tried to think. Was there anyone else
on Venus he could call? Only Max Krandall, his jewel broker. But Max
couldn't raise fourteen hundred dollars in that crummy two-by-four
office near Venusborg's jewel market. Max could barely scrape up his
own rent, much less take care of stranded prospectors.

"I can't ask Max for help," Morrison decided. "Not until I've found
goldenstone. The real stuff, not just traces. So that leaves it up to
me."

He opened the back of the sandcar and began to unload, piling his
equipment on the sand. He would have to choose carefully; anything he
took would have to be carried on his back.

The telephone had to go with him, and his lightweight testing kit.
Food concentrates, revolver, compass. And nothing else but water, all
the water he could carry. The rest of the stuff would have to stay
behind.

By nightfall, Morrison was ready. He looked regretfully at the twenty
cans of water he was leaving. In the desert, water was a man's most
precious possession, second only to his telephone. But it couldn't
be helped. After drinking his fill, he hoisted his pack and set a
southwest course into the desert.

For three days he trekked to the southwest; then on the fourth day he
veered to due south, following an increasingly rich trace. The sun,
eternally hidden, beat down on him, and the dead-white sky was like a
roof of heated iron over his head. Morrison followed the traces, and
something followed him.

On the sixth day, he sensed movement just out of the range of his
vision. On the seventh day, he saw what was trailing him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Venus's own brand of wolf, small, lean, with a yellow coat and long,
grinning jaws, it was one of the few mammals that made its home in the
Scorpion Desert. As Morrison watched, two more sandwolves appeared
beside it.

He loosened the revolver in its holster. The wolves made no attempt to
come closer. They had plenty of time.

Morrison kept on going, wishing he had brought a rifle with him. But
that would have meant eight pounds more, which meant eight pounds less
water.

As he was pitching camp at dusk the eighth day, he heard a crackling
sound. He whirled around and located its source, about ten feet to his
left and above his head. A little vortex had appeared, a tiny mouth in
the air like a whirlpool in the sea. It spun, making the characteristic
crackling sounds of 'porting.

"Now who could be 'porting anything to me?" Morrison asked, waiting
while the whirlpool slowly widened.

Solidoporting from a base projector to a field target was a standard
means of moving goods across the vast distances of Venus. Any inanimate
object could be 'ported; animate beings couldn't because the process
involved certain minor but distressing molecular changes in protoplasm.
A few people had found this out the hard way when 'porting was first
introduced.

Morrison waited. The aerial whirlpool became a mouth three feet in
diameter. From the mouth stepped a chrome-plated robot carrying a large
sack.

"Oh, it's you," Morrison said.

"Yes, sir," the robot said, now completely clear of the field.
"Williams 4 at your service with the Venus Mail."

It was a robot of medium height, thin-shanked and flat-footed, humanoid
in appearance, amiable in disposition. For twenty-three years it
had been Venus's entire postal service--sorter, deliverer, and dead
storage. It had been built to last, and for twenty-three years the
mails had always come through.

"Here we are, Mr. Morrison," Williams 4 said. "Only twice-a-month
mail call in the desert, I'm sorry to say, but it comes promptly and
that's a blessing. This is for you. And this. I think there's one more.
Sandcar broke down, eh?"

"It sure did," Morrison said, taking his letters.

Williams 4 went on rummaging through its bag. Although it was a
superbly efficient postman, the old robot was known as the worst gossip
on three planets.

"There's one more in here somewhere," Williams 4 said. "Too bad about
the sandcar. They just don't build 'em like they did in my youth. Take
my advice, young man. Turn back if you still have the chance."

Morrison shook his head.

"Foolish, downright foolish," the old robot said. "Pity you don't have
my perspective. Too many's the time I've come across you boys lying in
the sand in the dried-out sack of your skin, or with your bones gnawed
to splinters by the sandwolves and the filthy black kites. Twenty-three
years I've been delivering mail to fine-looking young men like you,
and each one thinking he's unique and different."

       *       *       *       *       *

The robot's eyecells became distant with memory. "But they _aren't_
different," Williams 4 said. "They're as alike as robots off the
assembly line--especially after the wolves get through with them. And
then I have to send their letters and personal effects back to their
loved ones on Earth."

"I know," Morrison said. "But some get through, don't they?"

"Sure they do," the robot said. "I've seen men make one, two, three
fortunes. And then die on the sands trying to make a fourth."

"Not me," Morrison said. "I just want one. Then I'm going to buy me an
undersea farm on Earth."

The robot shuddered. "I have a dread of salt water. But to each his
own. Good luck, young man."

The robot looked Morrison over carefully--probably to see what he had
in the way of personal effects--then climbed back into the aerial
whirlpool. In a moment, it was gone. In another moment, the whirlpool
had vanished.

Morrison sat down to read his mail. The first letter was from his
jewel broker, Max Krandall. It told about the depression that had hit
Venusborg, and hinted that Krandall might have to go into bankruptcy if
some of his prospectors didn't strike something good.

The second letter was a statement from the Venus Telephone Company.
Morrison owed two hundred and ten dollars and eight cents for two
months' telephone service. Unless he remitted this sum at once, his
telephone was liable to be turned off.

The last letter, all the way from Earth, was from Janie. It was filled
with news about his cousins, aunts and uncles. She told him about the
Atlantic farm sites she had looked over, and the wonderful little place
she had found near Martinique in the Caribbean. She begged him to give
up prospecting if it looked dangerous; they could find another way
of financing the farm. She sent all her love and wished him a happy
birthday in advance.

"Birthday?" Morrison asked himself. "Let's see, today is July
twenty-third. No, it's the twenty-fourth, and my birthday's August
first. Thanks for remembering, Janie."

That night he dreamed of Earth and the blue expanse of the Atlantic
Ocean. But toward dawn, when the heat of Venus became insistent, he
found he was dreaming of mile upon mile of goldenstone, of grinning
sandwolves, and of the Prospector's Special.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rock gave way to sand as Morrison plowed his way across the bottom of a
long-vanished lake. Then it was rock again, twisted and tortured into a
thousand gaunt shapes. Reds, yellows and browns swam in front of his
eyes. In all that desert, there wasn't one patch of green.

He continued his trek into the tumbled stone mazes of the interior
desert, and the wolves trekked with him, keeping pace far out on either
flank.

Morrison ignored them. He had enough on his mind just to negotiate the
sheer cliffs and the fields of broken stone that blocked his way to the
south.

By the eleventh day after leaving the sandcar, the traces were almost
rich enough for panning. The sandwolves were tracking him still, and
his water was almost gone. Another day's march would finish him.

Morrison thought for a moment, then unstrapped his telephone and dialed
Public Utility in Venusborg.

The video screen showed a stern, severely dressed woman with iron-gray
hair. "Public Utility," she said. "May we be of service?"

"Hi," Morrison said cheerfully. "How's the weather in Venusborg?"

"Hot," the woman said. "How's it out there?"

"I hadn't even noticed," Morrison said, grinning. "Too busy counting my
fortune."

"You've found goldenstone?" the woman asked, her expression becoming
less severe.

"Sure have," Morrison said. "But don't pass the word around yet. I'm
still staking my claim. I think I can use a refill on these."

Smiling easily, he held up his canteens. Sometimes it worked.
Sometimes, if you showed enough confidence, Public Utility would fill
you up without checking your account. True, it was embezzling, but this
was no time for niceties.

"I suppose your account is in order?" asked the woman.

"Of course," Morrison said, feeling his smile grow stiff. "The name's
Tom Morrison. You can just check--"

"Oh, I don't do that personally," the woman said. "Hold that canteen
steady. Here we go."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gripping the canteen in both hands, Morrison watched as the water,
'ported four thousand miles from Venusborg, appeared as a slender
crystal stream above the mouth of his canteen. The stream entered the
canteen, making a wonderful gurgling sound. Watching it, Morrison found
his dry mouth actually was beginning to salivate.

Then the water stopped.

"What's the matter?" Morrison asked.

His video screen went blank. Then it cleared, and Morrison found
himself staring into a man's narrow face. The man was seated in front
of a large desk. The sign in front of him read _Milton P. Reade, Vice
President, Accounts_.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Mr. Morrison," Reade said, "your account is overdrawn. You have been
obtaining water under false pretenses. That is a criminal offense."

"I'm going to pay for the water," Morrison said.

"When?"

"As soon as I get back to Venusborg."

"With what," asked Mr. Reade, "do you propose to pay?"

"With goldenstone," Morrison said. "Look around here, Mr. Reade. The
traces are rich! Richer than they were for the Kirk claim! I'll be
hitting the outcroppings in another day--"

"That's what every prospector thinks," Mr. Reade said. "Every
prospector on Venus is only a day from goldenstone. And they all expect
credit from Public Utility."

"But in this case--"

"Public Utility," Mr. Reade continued inexorably, "is not a
philanthropic organization. Its charter specifically forbids the
extension of credit. Venus is a frontier, Mr. Morrison, a _farflung_
frontier. Every manufactured article on Venus must be imported from
Earth at outrageous cost. We do have our own water, but locating it,
purifying it, then 'porting it is an expensive process. This company,
like every other company on Venus, necessarily operates on a very
narrow margin of profit, which is invariably plowed back into further
expansion. That is why there can be no credit on Venus."

"I know all that," Morrison said. "But I'm telling you, I only need a
day or two more--"

"Absolutely impossible. By the rules, we shouldn't even help you out
now. The time to report bankruptcy was a week ago, when your sandcar
broke down. Your garage man reported, as required by law. But you
didn't. We would be within our rights to leave you stranded. Do you
understand that?"

"Yes, of course," Morrison said wearily.

"However, the company has decided to stretch a point in your favor. If
you turn back immediately, we will keep you supplied with water for the
return trip."

"I'm not turning back yet. I'm almost on the real stuff."

"You must turn back! Be reasonable, Morrison! Where would we be if
we let every prospector wander over the desert while we supplied his
water? There'd be ten thousand men out there, and we'd be out of
business inside of a year. I'm stretching the rules now. Turn back."

"No," said Morrison.

"You'd better think about it. If you don't turn back now, Public
Utility takes no further responsibility for your water supply."

Morrison nodded. If he went on, he would stand a good chance of
dying in the desert. But if he turned back, what then? He would be in
Venusborg, penniless and in debt, looking for work in an overcrowded
city. He'd sleep in a community shed and eat at a soup kitchen with
the other prospectors who had turned back. And how would he be able to
raise the fare back to Earth? When would he ever see Janie again?

"I guess I'll keep on going," Morrison said.

"Then Public Utility takes no further responsibility for you," Reade
repeated, and hung up.

Morrison packed up his telephone, took a sip from his meager water
supply, and went on.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sandwolves loped along at each side, moving in closer. Overhead, a
delta-winged kite found him. It balanced on the up-drafts for a day and
a night, waiting for the wolves to finish him. Then a flock of small
flying scorpions sighted the waiting kite. They drove the big creature
upstairs into the cloud bank. For a day the flying reptiles waited.
Then they in turn were driven off by a squadron of black kites.

The traces were very rich now, on the fifteenth day since he had left
the sandcar. By rights, he should be walking over goldenstone. He
should be surrounded by goldenstone. But still he hadn't found any.

Morrison sat down and shook his last canteen. It gave off no wet sound.
He uncapped it and turned it up over his mouth. Two drops trickled down
his parched throat.

It was about four days since he had talked to Public Utility. He must
have used up the last of his water yesterday. Or had it been the day
before?

He recapped the empty canteen and looked around at the heat-blasted
landscape. Abruptly he pulled the telephone out of his pack and dialed
Max Krandall in Venusborg.

Krandall's round, worried face swam into focus on the screen. "Tommy,"
he said, "you look like hell."

"I'm all right," Morrison said. "A little dried out, that's all. Max,
I'm near goldenstone."

"Are you sure?" Krandall asked.

"See for yourself," Morrison said, swinging the telephone around. "Look
at the stone formations! Do you see the red and purple markings over
there?"

"Traces, all right," Krandall admitted dubiously.

"There's rich stuff just beyond it," Morrison said. "There has to be!
Look, Max, I know you're short on money, but I'm going to ask you a
favor. Send me a pint of water. Just a pint, so I can go on for another
day or two. We can both get rich for the price of a pint of water."

"I can't do it," Krandall said sadly.

"You can't?"

"That's right. Tommy, I'd send you water even if there wasn't anything
around you but sandstone and granite. Do you think I'd let you die of
thirst if I could help it? But I can't do a thing. Take a look."

       *       *       *       *       *

Krandall rotated his telephone. Morrison saw that the chairs, table,
desk, filing cabinet and safe were gone from the office. All that was
left in the room was the telephone.

"I don't know why they haven't taken out the phone," Krandall said. "I
owe two months on my bill."

"I do too," said Morrison.

"I'm stripped," Krandall said. "I haven't got a dime. Don't get me
wrong, I'm not worried about myself. I can always eat at a soup
kitchen. But I can't 'port you any water. Not you or Remstaater."

"Jim Remstaater?"

"Yeah. He was following a trace up north past Forgotten River. His
sandcar broke an axle last week and he wouldn't turn back. His water
ran out yesterday."

"I'd bail him out if I could," said Morrison.

"And he'd bail you out if he could," Krandall said. "But he can't and
you can't and I can't. Tommy, you have only one hope."

"What's that?"

"Find goldenstone. Not just traces, find the real thing worth real
money. Then phone me. If you really have goldenstone, I'll bring in
Wilkes from Tri-Planet Mining and get him to advance us some money.
He'll probably want fifty per cent of the claim."

"That's plain robbery!"

"No, it's just the high cost of credit on Venus," Krandall answered.
"Don't worry, there'll still be plenty left over. But you have to find
goldenstone first."

"OK," Morrison said. "It should be around here somewhere. Max, what's
today's date?"

"July thirty-first. Why?"

"Just wondering. I'll call you when I've found something."

After hanging up, Morrison sat on a little boulder and stared dully
at the sand. July thirty-first. Tomorrow was his birthday. His family
would be thinking about him. Aunt Bess in Pasadena, the twins in Laos,
Uncle Ted in Durango. And Janie, of course, waiting for him in Tampa.

Morrison realized that tomorrow might be his last birthday unless he
found goldenstone.

He got to his feet, strapped the telephone back in his pack beside the
empty canteens, and set a course to the south.

       *       *       *       *       *

He wasn't alone. The birds and beasts of the desert marched with him.
Overhead, the silent black kites circled endlessly. The sandwolves
crept closer on his flanks, their red tongues lolling out, waiting for
the carcass to fall....

"I'm not dead yet!" Morrison shouted at them.

He drew his revolver and fired at the nearest wolf. At twenty feet, he
missed. He went down on one knee, held the revolver tightly in both
hands and fired again. The wolf yelped in pain. The pack immediately
went for the wounded animal, and the kites swooped down for their share.

Morrison put the revolver back in its holster and went on. He could
tell he was in a badly dehydrated state. The landscape jumped and
danced in front of him, and his footing was unsure. He discarded the
empty canteens, threw away everything but the testing kit, telephone
and revolver. Either he was coming out of the desert in style or he
wasn't coming out at all.

The traces continued to run rich. But still he came upon no sign of
tangible wealth.

That evening he found a shallow cave set into the base of a cliff. He
crawled inside and built a barricade of rocks across the entrance. Then
he drew his revolver and leaned back against the far wall.

The sandwolves were outside, sniffing and snapping their jaws. Morrison
propped himself up and got ready for an all-night vigil.

He didn't sleep, but he couldn't stay awake, either. Dreams and
visions tormented him. He was back on Earth and Janie was saying to
him, "It's the tuna. Something must be wrong with their diet. Every
last one of them is sick."

"It's the darnedest thing," Morrison told her. "Just as soon as you
domesticate a fish, it turns into a prima donna."

"Are you going to stand there philosophizing," Janie asked, "while your
fish are sick?"

"Call the vet."

"I did. He's off at the Blake's place, taking care of their dairy
whale."

"All right, I'll go out and take a look." He slipped on his face mask.
Grinning, he said, "I don't even have time to dry off before I have to
go out again."

His face and chest were wet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morrison opened his eyes. His face and chest _were_ wet--from
perspiration. Staring at the partially blocked mouth of the cave, he
could see green eyes, two, four, six, eight.

He fired at them, but they didn't retreat. He fired again, and
his bullet richocheted off the cave wall, stinging him with stone
splinters. With his next shots, he succeeded in winging one of the
wolves. The pack withdrew.

That emptied the revolver. Morrison searched through his pockets and
found five more cartridges. He carefully loaded the gun. Dawn couldn't
be far away now.

And then he was dreaming again, this time of the Prospector's Special.
He had heard about it in every little saloon that bordered the
Scorpion. Bristly-bearded old prospectors told a hundred different
stories about it, and the cynical bartenders chimed in with their
versions. Kirk had it in '89, ordered up big and special just for him.
Edmonson and Arsler received it in '93. That was certain. And other men
had had it too, as they sat on their precious goldenstone claims. Or so
people said.

But was it real? Was there such a thing as the Prospector's Special?
Would he live to see that rainbow-hued wonder, tall as a church
steeple, wide as a house, more precious than goldenstone itself?

Sure he would! Why, he could almost see it now....

Morrison shook himself awake. It was morning. Painfully, he crawled out
of the cave to face the day.

He stumbled and crawled to the south, escorted closely by wolves,
shaded by predatory flying things. His fingers scrabbled along rock and
sand. The traces were rich, rich!

But where in all this desolation was the goldenstone?

Where? He was almost past caring. He drove his sunburned, dried-out
body, stopping only to fire a single shot when the wolves came too
close.

Four bullets left.

He had to fire again when the kites, growing impatient, started diving
at his head. A lucky shot tore into the flock, downing two. It gave the
wolves something to fight over. Morrison crawled on blindly.

And fell over the edge of a little cliff.

It wasn't a serious fall, but the revolver was knocked from his hand.
Before he could find it, the wolves were on him. Only their greed saved
Morrison. While they fought over him, he rolled away and retrieved his
revolver. Two shots scattered the pack. That left one bullet.

He'd have to save that one for himself, because he was too tired to
go on. He sank to his knees. The traces were rich here. Fantastically
rich. Somewhere nearby....

"Well, I'll be damned," Morrison said.

The little ravine into which he had fallen was solid goldenstone.

       *       *       *       *       *

He picked up a pebble. Even in its rough state he could see the deep
luminous golden glow, the fiery red and purple flecks deep in the
shining stone.

"Make sure," Morrison told himself. "No false alarms, no visions, no
wild hopes. Make sure."

He broke off a chunk of rock with the butt of his revolver. It still
looked like goldenstone. He took out his testing kit and spilled a few
drops of white solution on the rock. The solution foamed green.

"Goldenstone, sure as sure," Morrison said, looking around at the
glowing cliff walls. "Hey, I'm rich!"

He took out his telephone. With trembling fingers he dialed Krandall's
number.

"Max!" Morrison shouted. "I've hit it! I've hit the real stuff!"

"My name is not Max," a voice over the telephone said.

"Huh?"

"My name is Boyard," the man said.

The video screen cleared, and Morrison saw a thin, sallow-faced man
with a hairline mustache.

"I'm sorry, Mr. Boyard," Morrison said. "I must have gotten the wrong
number. I was calling--"

"It doesn't matter who you were calling," Mr. Boyard said. "I am
District Supervisor of the Venus Telephone Company. Your bill is two
months overdue."

"I can pay it now," Morrison said, grinning.

"Excellent," said Mr. Boyard. "As soon as you do, your service will be
resumed."

The screen began to fade.

"Wait!" Morrison cried. "I can pay as soon as I reach your office. But
I must make one telephone call. Just one call, so that I--"

"Not a chance," Mr. Boyard said decisively. "_After_ you have paid your
bill, your service will be turned on immediately."

"I've got the money right here!" Morrison said. "Right here in my hand!"

Mr. Boyard paused. "Well, it's unusual, but I suppose we could arrange
for a special robot messenger if you are willing to pay the expenses."

"I am!"

"Hm. It's irregular, but I daresay we ... Where is the money?"

"Right here," Morrison said. "You recognize it, don't you? It's
goldenstone!"

"I am sick and tired of the tricks you prospectors think you can put
over on us. Holding up a handful of pebbles--"

"But this is really goldenstone! Can't you see it?"

"I am a businessman," Mr. Boyard said, "not a jeweler. I wouldn't know
goldenstone from goldenrod."

The video screen went blank.

       *       *       *       *       *

Frantically, Morrison tried to reach the operator. There was nothing,
not even a dial tone. His telephone was disconnected.

He put the instrument down and surveyed his situation. The narrow
crevice into which he had fallen ran straight for about twenty yards,
then curved to the left. No cave was visible in the steep walls, no
place where he could build a barricade.

He heard a movement behind him. Whirling around, he saw a huge old wolf
in full charge. Without a moment's hesitation, Morrison drew and fired,
blasting off the top of the beast's head.

"Damn it," Morrison said. "I was going to save that bullet for myself."

It gave him a moment's grace. He ran down the ravine, looking for an
opening in its sides. Goldenstone glowed at him and sparkled red and
purple. And the sandwolves loped along behind him.

Then Morrison stopped. In front of him, the curving ravine ended in a
sheer wall.

He put his back against it, holding the revolver by its butt. The
wolves stopped five feet from him, gathering themselves for a rush.
There were ten or twelve of them, and they were packed three deep in
the narrow pass. Overhead, the kites circled, waiting for their turn.

At that moment, Morrison heard the crackling sound of 'porting
equipment. A whirlpool appeared above the wolves' heads and they backed
hastily away.

"Just in time!" Morrison said.

"In time for what?" asked Williams 4, the postman.

The robot climbed out of the vortex and looked around.

"Well, young man," Williams 4 said, "this is a fine fix you've gotten
yourself into. Didn't I warn you? Didn't I advise you to turn back? And
now look!"

"You were perfectly right," Morrison said. "What did Max Krandall send
me?"

"Max Krandall did not, and could not, send a thing."

"Then why are you here?"

"Because it's your birthday," Williams 4 said. "We of the Postal
Department always give special service for birthdays. Here you are."

Williams 4 gave him a handful of mail, birthday greetings from Janie,
and from his aunts, uncles and cousins on Earth.

"Something else here," Williams 4 said, rummaging in his bag. "I
_think_ there was something else here. Let me see.... Yes, here it is."

He handed Morrison a small package.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hastily, Morrison tore off the wrappings. It was a birthday present
from his Aunt Mina in New Jersey. He opened it. It was a large box of
salt-water taffy, direct from Atlantic City.

"Quite a delicacy, I'm told," said Williams 4, who had been peering
over his shoulder. "But not very satisfactory under the circumstances.
Well, young man, I hate to see anyone die on his birthday. The best I
can wish you is a speedy and painless departure."

The robot began walking toward the vortex.

"Wait!" Morrison cried. "You can't just leave me like this! I haven't
had any water in days! And those wolves--"

"I know," Williams 4 said. "Do you think I feel _happy_ about it? Even
a robot has some feelings!"

"Then help me."

"I can't. The rules of the Postal Department expressly and
categorically forbid it. I remember Abner Lathe making much the same
request of me in '97. It took three years for a burial party to reach
him."

"You have an emergency telephone, haven't you?" Morrison asked.

"Yes. But I can use it only for personal emergencies."

"Can you at least carry a letter for me? A special delivery letter?"

"Of course I can," the robot postman said. "That's what I'm here for. I
can even lend you pencil and paper."

Morrison accepted the pencil and paper and tried to think. If he wrote
to Max now, special delivery, Max would have the letter in a matter of
hours. But how long would Max need to raise some money and send him
water and ammunition? A day, two days? Morrison would have to figure
out some way of holding out....

"I assume you have a stamp," the robot said.

"I don't," Morrison replied. "But I'll buy one from you. Solidoport
special."

"Excellent," said the robot. "We have just put out a new series
of Venusborg triangulars. I consider them quite an esthetic
accomplishment. They cost three dollars apiece."

"That's fine. Very reasonable. Let me have one."

"There is the question of payment."

"Here," Morrison said, handing the robot a piece of goldenstone worth
about five thousand dollars in the rough.

The postman examined the stone, then handed it back. "I'm sorry, I can
accept only cash."

"But this is worth more than a thousand postage stamps!" Morrison said.
"This is goldenstone!"

"It may well be," Williams 4 said. "But I have never had any assaying
knowledge taped into me. Nor is the Venus Postal Service run on a
barter system. I'll have to ask for three dollars in bills or coins."

"I don't have it."

"I am very sorry." Williams 4 turned to go.

"You can't just go and let me die!"

"I can and must," Williams 4 said sadly. "I am only a robot, Mr.
Morrison. I was made by men, and naturally I partake of some of their
sensibilities. That's as it should be. But I also have my limits,
which, in their nature, are similar to the limits most humans have on
this harsh planet. And, unlike humans, I cannot transcend my limits."

The robot started to climb into the whirlpool. Morrison stared at him
blankly, and saw beyond him the waiting wolfpack. He saw the soft glow
of several million dollars' worth of goldenstone shining from the
ravine's walls.

Something snapped inside him.

       *       *       *       *       *

With an inarticulate yell, Morrison dived, tackling the robot around
the ankles. Williams 4, half in and half out of the 'porting vortex,
struggled and kicked, and almost succeeded in shaking Morrison loose.
But with a maniac's strength Morrison held on. Inch by inch he dragged
the robot out of the vortex, threw him on the ground and pinned him.

"You are disrupting the mail service," said Williams 4.

"That's not all I'm going to disrupt," Morrison growled. "I'm not
afraid of dying. That was part of the gamble. But I'm damned if I'm
going to die fifteen minutes after I've struck it rich!"

"You have no choice."

"I do. I'm going to use that emergency telephone of yours."

"You can't," Williams 4 said. "I refuse to extrude it. And you could
never reach it without the resources of a machine shop."

"Could be," said Morrison. "I plan to find out." He pulled out his
empty revolver.

"What are you going to do?" Williams 4 asked.

"I'm going to see if I can smash you into scrap metal _without_ the
resources of a machine shop. I think your eyecells would be a logical
place to begin."

"They would indeed," said the robot. "I have no personal sense of
survival, of course. But let me point out that you would be leaving all
Venus without a postman. Many would suffer because of your anti-social
action."

"I hope so," Morrison said, raising the revolver above his head.

"Also," the robot said hastily, "you would be destroying government
property. That is a serious offense."

Morrison laughed and swung the pistol. The robot moved its head
quickly, dodging the blow. It tried to wriggle free, but Morrison's two
hundred pounds was seated firmly on its thorax.

"I won't miss this time," Morrison promised, hefting the revolver.

"Stop!" Williams 4 said. "It is my duty to protect government property,
even if that property happens to be myself. You may use my telephone,
Mr. Morrison. Bear in mind that this offense is punishable by a
sentence of not more than ten and not less than five years in the
Solar Swamp Penitentiary."

"Let's have that telephone," Morrison said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The robot's chest opened and a small telephone extruded. Morrison
dialed Max Krandall and explained the situation.

"I see, I see," Krandall said. "All right, I'll try to find Wilkes.
But, Tom, I don't know how much I can do. It's after business hours.
Most places are closed--"

"Get them open again," said Morrison. "I can pay for it. And get Jim
Remstaater out of trouble, too."

"It can't be done just like that. You haven't established any rights to
your claim. You haven't even proved that your claim is valuable."

"Look at it." Morrison turned the telephone so that Krandall could see
the glowing walls of the ravine.

"Looks real," Krandall said. "But unfortunately, all that glitters is
not goldenstone."

"What can we do?" Morrison asked.

"We'll have to take it step by step. I'll 'port you the Public
Surveyor. He'll check your claim, establish its limits, and make sure
no one else has filed on it. You give him a chunk of goldenstone to
take back. A big chunk."

"How can I cut goldenstone? I don't have any tools."

"You'll have to figure out a way. He'll take the chunk back for
assaying. If it's rich enough, you're all set."

"And if it isn't?"

"Perhaps we better not talk about that," Krandall said. "I'll get right
to work on this, Tommy. Good luck!"

Morrison signed off. He stood up and helped the robot to its feet.

"In twenty-three years of service," Williams 4 said, "this is the first
time anybody has threatened the life of a government postal employee. I
must report this to the police authorities at Venusborg, Mr. Morrison.
I have no choice."

"I know," Morrison said. "But I guess five or ten years in the
penitentiary is better than dying."

"I doubt it. I carry mail there, you know. You will have the
opportunity of seeing for yourself in about six months."

"What?" said Morrison, stunned.

"In about six months, after I have completed my mail calls around the
planet and returned to Venusborg. A matter like this must be reported
in person. But first and foremost, the mails must go through."

"Thanks, Williams. I don't know how--"

"I am simply performing my duty," the robot said as it climbed into the
vortex. "If you are still on Venus in six months, I will be delivering
your mail to the penitentiary."

"I won't be here," Morrison said. "So long, Williams!"

The robot disappeared into the 'porting vortex. Then the vortex
disappeared. Morrison was alone in the Venusian twilight.

       *       *       *       *       *

He found an outcropping of goldenstone larger than a man's head. He
chipped at it with his pistol butt, and tiny particles danced and
shimmered in the air. After an hour, he had put four dents in his
revolver, but he had barely scratched the highly refractory surface of
the goldenstone.

The sandwolves began to edge forward. Morrison threw stones at them and
shouted in his dry, cracked voice. The wolves retreated.

He examined the outcropping again and found a hairline fault running
along one edge. He concentrated his blows along the fault.

The goldenstone refused to crack.

Morrison wiped sweat from his eyes and tried to think. A chisel, he
needed a chisel....

He pulled off his belt. Putting the edge of the steel buckle against
the crack, he managed to hammer it in a fraction of an inch. Three more
blows drove the buckle firmly into the fault. With another blow, the
outcropping sheared off cleanly. He had separated a twenty-pound piece
from the cliff. At fifty dollars a troy ounce, this lump should be
worth about twelve thousand dollars--if it assayed out as pure as it
looked.

The twilight had turned a deep gray when the Public Surveyor 'ported
in. It was a short, squat robot with a conservative crackle-black
finish.

"Good day, sir," the surveyor said. "You wish to file a claim? A
standard unrestricted mining claim?"

"That's right," Morrison said.

"And where is the center of the aforesaid claim?"

"Huh? The center? I guess I'm standing on it."

"Very well," the robot said.

Extruding a steel tape, it walked rapidly away from Morrison. At a
distance of two hundred yards, it stopped. More steel tape fluttered as
it walked, flew and climbed a square with Morrison at the center. When
it had finished, the surveyor stood for a long time without moving.

"What are you doing?" Morrison asked.

"I'm making depth-photographs of the terrain," the robot said. "It's
rather difficult in this light. Couldn't you wait till morning?"

"No!"

"Well, I'll just have to cope," the robot said.

It moved and stood, moved and stood, each subterranean exposure taking
longer than the last as the twilight deepened. If it had had pores, it
would have sweated.

"There," said the robot at last, "that takes care of it. Do you have a
sample for me to take back?"

"Here it is," Morrison said, hefting the slab of goldenstone and
handing it to the surveyor. "Is that all?"

"Absolutely all," the robot said. "Except, of course, that you haven't
given me the Deed of Search."

       *       *       *       *       *

Morrison blinked. "I haven't given you the what?"

"The Deed of Search. That is a government document showing that
the claim you are filing on is free, as per government order, of
fissionable material in excess of fifty per cent of the total mass to a
depth of sixty feet. It's a mere formality, but a necessary one."

"I never heard of it," Morrison said.

"It became a requirement last week," explained the surveyor. "You don't
have the Deed? Then I'm afraid your standard unrestricted claim is
invalid."

"Isn't there anything I can do?"

"Well," the robot said, "you _could_ change your standard unrestricted
claim to a special restricted claim. That requires no Deed of Search."

"What does the special restricted part mean?"

"It means that in five hundred years all rights revert to the
Government of Venus."

"All right!" Morrison shouted. "Fine! Good! Is that all?"

"Absolutely all," the surveyor said. "I shall bring this sample
back and have it assayed and evaluated immediately. From it and the
depth-photographs we can extrapolate the value and extent of your
claim."

"Send me back something to take care of the wolves," Morrison said.
"And food. And listen--I want a Prospector's Special."

"Yes, sir. It will all be 'ported to you--if your claim is of
sufficient value to warrant the outlay."

The robot climbed into the vortex and vanished.

Time passed, and the wolves edged forward again. They snarled at the
rocks Morrison threw, but they didn't retreat. Jaws open and tongues
lolling, they crept up the remaining yards between them and the
prospector.

Then the leading wolf leaped back and howled. A gleaming vortex had
appeared over his head and a rifle had fallen from the vortex, striking
him on a forepaw.

The wolves scrambled away. Another rifle fell from the vortex. Then a
large box marked _Grenades, Handle With Care_. Then another box marked
_Desert Ration K_.

Morrison waited, staring at the gleaming mouth of the vortex. It
crossed the sky to a spot a quarter of a mile away and paused there,
and then a great round brass base emerged from the vortex, and the
mouth widened to allow an even greater bulge of brass to which the
base was attached. The bulge grew higher as the base was lowered
to the sand. When the last of it appeared, it stood alone in the
horizon-to-horizon expanse, a gigantic ornate brass punchbowl in the
desert. The vortex rose and paused again over the bowl.

Morrison waited, his throat raw and aching. Now a small trickle came
out of the vortex and splashed down into the bowl. Still Morrison
didn't move.

       *       *       *       *       *

And then it came. The trickle became a roar that sent the wolves and
kites fleeing in terror, and a cataract poured from the vortex to the
huge punchbowl.

Morrison began staggering toward it. He should have ordered a canteen,
he told himself thirstily, stumbling across the quarter of a mile of
sand. But at last he stood beneath the Prospector's Special, higher
than a church steeple, wider than a house, filled with water more
precious than goldenstone itself. He turned the spigot at the bottom.
Water soaked the yellow sands and ran in rivulets down the dune.

He should have ordered a cup or glass, Morrison thought, lying on his
back with open mouth.[Transcriber's Notes:

  1. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
copyright on this publication was renewed.

  2. Several misprints corrected. The complete list may be found
at the end of the file.]




"Yes sir. Well, there are three men outside trying to kill me...."

"Quite right," Mr. Frendlyer said. "And today is Landing Day. You came
off the ship that landed today, and have been classified a peon.... I'm
happy to say that everything is in order. The Landing Day Hunt ends at
sundown. You can leave here with the knowledge that everything is
correct and that your rights have not been violated."

"Leave here? After sundown, you mean."

Mr. Frendlyer shook his head and smiled sadly. "I'm afraid not.
According to the law you must leave here at once."

"But they'll kill me!"

"That's very true. Unfortunately it can't be helped. A victim by
definition is one who is to be killed.... We protect rights, not
victims."

                 OMEGA: PRISON PLANET
             LIFE EXPECTANCY: THREE YEARS
                       MAXIMUM
                   MOST PEOPLE ARE
                  LUCKIER THAN THAT....




     Books by
     ROBERT SHECKLEY:

     CITIZEN IN SPACE
     IMMORTALITY, INC.
     MINDSWAP
     PILGRIMAGE TO EARTH
     THE 10TH VICTIM
     UNTOUCHED BY HUMAN HANDS
     DIMENSION OF MIRACLES
     THE JOURNEY OF JOENES
     THE STATUS CIVILIZATION/NOTIONS: UNLIMITED


       _From ACE Science Fiction_




                   THE STATUS
                  CIVILIZATION

                ROBERT SHECKLEY


                   ace books

  A Division of Charter Communications Inc.
          A GROSSET & DUNLAP COMPANY

            360 Park Avenue South
          New York, New York 10010




THE STATUS CIVILIZATION

Copyright (C) 1960 by Robert Sheckley

First appeared under the title _Omega in Amazing Science Fiction
Stories_, published by Ziff-Davis.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form
or by any means, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a
review, without permission in writing from the publisher.

All characters in this book are fictitious. Any resemblance to actual
persons, living or dead, is purely coincidental.

An ACE Book

_Cover art by David Bergen_

First Ace printing: November 1979

2468097531

Manufactured in the United States of America




CONTENTS

     THE STATUS CIVILIZATION    1




TO ANYA




THE STATUS CIVILIZATION




Chapter One


His return to consciousness was a slow and painful process. It was a
journey in which he traversed all time. He dreamed. He rose through
thick layers of sleep, out of the imaginary beginnings of all things. He
lifted a pseudopod from primordial ooze, and the pseudopod was _him_. He
became an amoeba which contained _his_ essence; then a fish marked with
his own peculiar individuality; then an ape unlike all other apes. And
finally, he became a man.

What kind of man? Dimly he saw himself, faceless, a beamer gripped tight
on one hand, a corpse at his feet. _That_ kind of man.

He awoke, rubbed his eyes, and waited for further memories to come.

No memories came. Not even his name.

He sat up hastily and willed memory to return. When it didn't, he looked
around, seeking in his surroundings some clue to his identity.

He was sitting on a bed in a small gray room. There was a closed door
on one side. On the other, through a curtained alcove, he could see a
tiny lavatory. Light came into the room from some hidden source, perhaps
from the ceiling itself. The room had a bed and a single chair, and
nothing else.

He held his chin in his hand and closed his eyes. He tried to catalogue
all his knowledge, and the implications of that knowledge. He knew that
he was a man, species Homo sapiens, an inhabitant of the planet Earth.
He spoke a language which he knew was English. (Did that mean that there
were other languages?) He knew the commonplace names for things: room,
light, chair. He possessed in addition a limited amount of general
knowledge. He knew that there were many important things which he did
not know, which he once had known.

_Something must have happened to me._

That something could have been worse. If it had gone a little further,
he might have been left a mindless creature without a language, unaware
of being human, of being a man, of being of Earth. A certain amount had
been left to him.

But when he tried to think beyond the basic facts in his possession, he
came to a dark and horror-filled area. _Do Not Enter._ Exploration into
his own mind was as dangerous as a journey to--what? He couldn't find an
analogue, though he suspected that many existed.

_I must have been sick._

That was the only reasonable explanation. He was a man with the
recollection of memories. He must at one time have had that priceless
wealth of recall which now he could only deduce from the limited
evidence at his disposal. At one time he must have had specific memories
of birds, trees, friends, family, status, a wife perhaps. Now he could
only theorize about them. Once he had been able to say, this is like,
or, that reminds me of. Now nothing reminded him of anything, and things
were only like themselves. He had lost his powers of contrast and
comparison. He could no longer analyze the present in terms of the
experienced past.

_This must be a hospital._

Of course. He was being cared for in this place. Kindly doctors were
working to restore his memory, to replace his identity, to restore his
judgment apparatus, to tell him who and what he was. It was very good of
them; he felt tears of gratitude start in his eyes.

He stood up and walked slowly around his small room. He went to the door
and found it locked. That locked door gave him a moment of panic which
he sternly controlled. Perhaps he had been violent.

Well, he wouldn't be violent any more. They'd see. They would award him
all possible patient privileges. He would speak about that with the
doctor.

He waited. After a long time, he heard footsteps coming down the
corridor outside his door. He sat on the edge of the cot and listened,
trying to control his excitement.

The footsteps stopped beside his door. A panel slid open, and a face
peered in.

"How are you feeling?" the man asked.

He walked up to the panel, and saw that the man who questioned him was
dressed in a brown uniform. He had an object on his waist which could
be identified, after a moment, as a weapon. This man was undoubtedly a
guard. He had a blunt, unreadable face.

"Could you tell me my name?" he asked the guard.

"Call yourself 402," the guard said. "That's your cell number."

He didn't like it. But 402 was better than nothing at all. He asked the
guard, "Have I been sick for long? Am I getting better?"

"Yes," the guard said, in a voice that carried no conviction. "The
important thing is, stay quiet. Obey the rules. That's the best way."

"Certainly," said 402. "But why can't I remember anything?"

"Well, that's the way it goes," the guard said. He started to walk away.

402 called after him, "Wait! You can't just leave me like this, you have
to tell me something. What happened to me? Why am I in this hospital?"

"Hospital?" the guard said. He turned toward 402 and grinned. "What gave
you the idea this was a hospital?"

"I assumed it," 402 said.

"You assumed wrong. This is a prison."

402 remembered his dream of the murdered man. Dream or memory?
Desperately he called after the guard. "What was my offense? What did I
do?"

"You'll find out," the guard said.

"When?"

"After we land," the guard said. "Now get ready for assembly."

He walked away. 402 sat down on the bed and tried to think. He had
learned a few things. He was in a prison, and the prison was going to
land. What did that mean? Why did a prison have to land? And what was an
assembly?

       *       *       *       *       *

402 had only a confused idea of what happened next. An unmeasurable
amount of time passed. He was sitting on his bed, trying to piece
together facts about himself. He had an impression of bells ringing. And
then the door of his cell flew open.

Why was that? What did it mean?

402 walked to the door and peered into the corridor. He was very
excited, but he didn't want to leave the security of his cell. He
waited, and the guard came up.

"All right, now," the guard said, "No one's going to hurt you. Go
straight down the corridor."

The guard pushed him gently. 402 walked down the corridor. He saw other
cell doors opening, other men coming into the corridor. It was a thin
stream at first; but as he continued walking, more and more men crowded
into the passageway. Most of them looked bewildered, and none of them
talked. The only words were from the guards:

"Move along now, keep on moving, straight ahead."

They were headed into a large circular auditorium. Looking around, 402
saw that a balcony ran around the room, and armed guards were stationed
every few yards along it. Their presence seemed unnecessary; these cowed
and bewildered men weren't going to stage a revolt. Still, he supposed
the grim-faced guards had a symbolic value. They reminded the newly
awakened men of the most important fact of their lives: that they were
prisoners.

After a few minutes, a man in a somber uniform stepped out on the
balcony. He held up his hand for attention, although the prisoners were
already watching him fixedly. Then, though he had no visible means of
amplification, his voice boomed hollowly through the auditorium.

"This is an indoctrination talk," he said. "Listen carefully and try to
absorb what I am about to tell you. These facts will be very important
for your existence."

The prisoners watched him. The speaker said, "All of you have, within
the last hour, awakened in your cells. You have discovered that you
cannot remember your former lives--not even your names. All you possess
is a meager store of generalized knowledge; enough to keep you in touch
with reality.

"I will not add to your knowledge. All of you, back on Earth, were
vicious and depraved criminals. You were people of the worst sort, men
who had forfeited any right to consideration by the State. In a less
enlightened age, you would have been executed. In our age, you have been
deported."

The speaker held out his hands to quiet the murmur that ran through the
auditorium. He said, "All of you are criminals. And all of you have one
thing in common: an inability to obey the basic obligatory rules of
human society. Those rules are necessary for civilization to function.
By disobeying them, you have committed crimes against all mankind.
Therefore mankind rejects you. You are grit in the machinery of
civilization, and you have been sent to a world where your own sort is
king. Here you can make your own rules, and die by them. Here is the
freedom you lusted for; the uncontained and self-destroying freedom of a
cancerous growth."

The speaker wiped his forehead and glared earnestly at the prisoners.
"But perhaps," he said, "a rehabilitation is possible for some of you.
Omega, the planet to which we are going, is _your_ planet, a place ruled
entirely by prisoners. It is a world where you could begin again, with
no prejudices against you, with a clean record! Your past lives are
forgotten. Don't try to remember them. Such memories would serve only to
restimulate your criminal tendencies. Consider yourselves born afresh as
of the moment of awakening in your cells."

The speaker's slow, measured words had a certain hypnotic quality. 402
listened, his eyes slightly unfocused and fixed upon the speaker's pale
forehead.

"A new world," the speaker was saying. "You are reborn--but with the
necessary consciousness of sin. Without it, you would be unable to
combat the evil inherent in your personalities. Remember that. Remember
that there is no escape and no return. Guardships armed with the latest
beam weapons patrol the skies of Omega day and night. These ships are
designed to obliterate anything that rises more than five hundred feet
above the surface of the planet--an invincible barrier through which no
prisoner can ever pass. Accommodate yourselves to these facts. They
constitute the rules which must govern your lives. Think about what
I've said. And now stand by for landing."

The speaker left the balcony. For a while, the prisoners simply stared
at the spot where he had been. Then, tentatively, a murmur of
conversation began. After a while it died away. There was nothing to
talk about. The prisoners, without memory of the past, had nothing upon
which to base a speculation of the future. Personalities could not be
exchanged, for those personalities were newly emerged and still
undefined.

They sat in silence, uncommunicative men who had been too long in
solitary confinement. The guards on the balcony stood like statues,
remote and impersonal. And then the faintest tremor ran through the
floor of the auditorium.

The tremor came again; then it changed into a definite vibration. 402
felt heavier, as though an invisible weight were pressing against his
head and shoulders.

A loudspeaker voice called out, "Attention! The ship is now landing on
Omega. We will disembark shortly."

       *       *       *       *       *

The last vibration died away, and the floor beneath them gave a slight
lurch. The prisoners, still silent and dazed, were formed into a long
line and marched out of the auditorium. Flanked by guards, they went
down a corridor which stretched on interminably. From it, 402 began to
get some idea of the size of the ship.

Far ahead, he could see a patch of sunlight which shone brightly against
the pale illumination of the corridor. His section of the long shuffling
line reached the sunlight, and 402 saw that it came from an open
hatchway through which the prisoners were passing.

In his turn, 402 went through the hatchway, climbed down a long
stairway, and found himself on solid ground. He was standing in an open,
sunlit square. Guards were forming the disembarked prisoners into files;
on all sides, 402 could see a crowd of spectators watching.

A loudspeaker voice boomed, "Answer when your number is called. Your
identity will now be revealed to you. Answer promptly when your number
is called."

402 felt weak and very tired. Not even his identity could interest him
now. All he wanted to do was lie down, to sleep, to have a chance to
think about his situation. He looked around and took casual note of the
huge starcraft behind him, of the guards, the spectators. Overhead, he
saw black dots moving against a blue sky. At first he thought they were
birds. Then, looking closer, he saw they were guardships. He wasn't
particularly interested in them.

"Number 1! Speak out!"

"Here," a voice answered.

"Number 1, your name is Wayn Southholder. Age 34, blood type A-L2, Index
AR-431-C. Guilty of treason."

When the voice had finished, a loud cheer came up from the crowd. They
were applauding the prisoner's traitorous actions, and welcoming him to
Omega.

The names were read down the list, and 402, drowsy in the sunshine,
dozed on his feet and listened to the crimes of murder, credit theft,
deviationalism, and mutantism. At last his number was called.

"Number 402."

"Here."

"Number 402, your name is Will Barrent. Age 27, blood type O-L3, Index
JX-221-R. Guilty of murder."

The crowd cheered, but 402 scarcely heard them. He was trying to
accustom himself to the idea of having a name. A real name instead of a
number. Will Barrent. He hoped he wouldn't forget it. He repeated the
name to himself over and over again, and almost missed the last
announcement from the ship's loudspeaker.

"The new men are now released upon Omega. You will be given temporary
housing at Square A-2. Be cautious and circumspect in your words and
actions. Watch, listen, and learn. The law requires me to tell you that
the average life expectancy on Omega is approximately three Earth
years."

It took a while for those last words to take effect on Barrent. He was
still contemplating the novelty of having a name. He hadn't considered
any of the implications of being a murderer on an underworld planet.




Chapter Two


The new prisoners were led to a row of barracks at Square A-2. There
were nearly five hundred of them. They were not yet men; they were
entities whose true memories extended barely an hour in time. Sitting on
their bunks, the newborns looked curiously at their bodies, examined
with sharp interest their hands and feet. They stared at each other, and
saw their formlessness mirrored in each other's eyes. They were not yet
men; but they were not children either. Certain abstractions remained,
and the ghosts of memories. Maturation came quickly, born of old habit
patterns and personality traits, retained in the broken threads of their
former lives on Earth.

The new men clung to the vague recollections of concepts, ideas, rules.
Within a few hours, their phlegmatic blandness had begun to pass. They
were becoming men now. Individuals. Out of a dazed and superficial
conformity, sharp differences began to emerge. Character reasserted
itself, and the five hundred began to discover what they were.

Will Barrent stood in line for a look at himself in the barracks mirror.
When his turn came, he saw the reflection of a thin-faced, narrow-nosed,
pleasant-looking young man with straight brown hair. The young man had a
resolute, honest, unexceptional face, unmarked by any strong passion.
Barrent turned away disappointed; it was the face of a stranger.

Later, examining himself more closely, he could find no scars or
anything else to distinguish his body from a thousand other bodies. His
hands were uncallused. He was wiry rather than muscular. He wondered
what sort of work he had done on Earth.

Murder?

He frowned. He wasn't ready to accept that.

A man tapped him on the shoulder. "How you feeling?"

Barrent turned and saw a large, thick-shouldered red-haired man standing
beside him.

"Pretty good," Barrent said. "You were in line behind me, weren't you?"

"That's right. Number 401. Name's Danis Foeren."

Barrent introduced himself.

"Your crime?" Foeren asked.

"Murder."

Foeren nodded, looking impressed. "Me, I'm a forger. Wouldn't think it
to look at my hands." He held out two massive paws covered with sparse
red hair. "But the skill's there. My hands remembered before any other
part of me. On the ship I sat in my cell and looked at my hands. They
itched. They wanted to be off and doing things. But the rest of me
couldn't remember what."

"What did you do?" Barrent asked.

"I closed my eyes and let my hands take over," Foeren said. "First thing
I knew, they were up and picking the lock of the cell." He held up his
huge hands and looked at them admiringly. "Clever little devils!"

"Picking the lock?" Barrent asked. "But I thought you were a forger."

"Well, now," Foeren said, "forgery was my main line. But a pair of
skilled hands can do almost anything. I suspect that I was only _caught_
for forgery; but I might also have been a safeman. My hands know too
much for just a forger."

"You've found out more about yourself than I have," Barrent said. "All I
have to start with is a dream."

"Well, that's a start," Foeren said. "There must be ways of finding out
more. The important thing is, we're on Omega."

"Agreed," Barrent said sourly.

"Nothing wrong with that," Foeren said. "Didn't you hear what the man
said? This is our planet!"

"With an average life expectancy of three Earth years," Barrent reminded
him.

"That's probably just scare talk," Foeren said. "I wouldn't believe
stuff like that from a guard. The big thing is, we have our own planet.
You heard what they said. 'Earth rejects us.' Nova Earth! Who needs her?
We've our own planet here. A whole planet, Barrent! We're free!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Another man said, "That's right, friend." He was small, furtive-eyed,
and ingratiatingly friendly. "My name is Joe," he told them. "Actually,
the name is Joao; but I prefer the archaic form with its flavor of more
gracious times. Gentlemen, I couldn't help overhearing your
conversation, and I agree most heartily with our red-haired friend.
Consider the possibilities! Earth has cast us aside? Excellent! We are
better off without her. We are all equal here, free men in a free
society. No uniforms, no guards, no soldiers. Just repentant former
criminals who want to live in peace."

"What did they get you for?" Barrent asked.

"They said I was a credit thief," Joe said. "I'm ashamed to admit that I
can't remember what a credit thief is. But perhaps it'll come back to
me."

"Maybe the authorities have some sort of memory retraining system,"
Foeren said.

"Authorities?" Joe said indignantly. "What do you mean, authorities?
This is _our_ planet. We're all equal here. By definition, there can't
be any authorities. No, friends, we left all that nonsense behind on
Earth. Here we--"

He stopped abruptly. The barracks' door had opened and a man walked in.
He was evidently an older resident of Omega since he lacked the gray
prison uniform. He was fat, and dressed in garish yellow and blue
clothing. On a belt around his ample waist he carried a holstered pistol
and a knife. He stood just inside the doorway, his hands on his hips,
glaring at the new arrivals.

"Well?" he said. "Don't you new men recognize a Quaestor? Stand up!"

None of the men moved.

The Quaestor's face went scarlet. "I guess I'll have to teach you a
little respect."

Even before he had taken his weapon from its holster, the new arrivals
had scrambled to their feet. The Quaestor looked at them with a faintly
regretful air and pushed the weapon back in its holster.

"The first thing you men better learn," the Quaestor said, "is your
status on Omega. Your status is _nowhere_. You're peons, and that means
you're _nothing_."

He waited a moment and then said, "Now pay attention, peons. You are
about to be instructed in your duties."




Chapter Three


"The first thing you new men should understand," the Quaestor said, "is
just exactly what you are. That's very important. And I'll tell you what
you are. You're _peons_. You're the lowest of the low. You're
_statusless_. There's nothing lower except mutants, and they aren't
really human. Any questions?"

The Quaestor waited. When there were no questions, he said, "I've
defined what _you_ are. From that, we'll proceed to a basic
understanding of what everybody else on Omega is. First of all,
_everybody_ is more important than you; but some are more important than
others. Next above you in rank is the Resident, who hardly counts for
more than any of you, and then there's the Free Citizen. He wears a gray
finger ring of status, and his clothes are black. He isn't important
either, but he's much more important than you. With luck, some of you
may become Free Citizens.

"Next are the Privileged Classes, all distinguished by various
recognition symbols according to rank--such as the golden earrings, for
example, of the Hadji class. Eventually you'll learn all the marks and
prerogatives of the various ranks and degrees. I might also mention the
priests. Even though they're not of Privileged rank, they're granted
certain immunities and rights. Have I made myself clear?"

Everyone in the barracks mumbled assent. The Quaestor continued, "Now we
come to the subject of deportment when meeting anyone of superior rank.
As peons, you are obliged to greet a Free Citizen by his full title, in
a respectful manner. With Privileged ranks such as Hadjis you speak only
when spoken to, and then you stand with eyes downcast and hands clasped
in front of you. You do not leave the presence of a Privileged Citizen
until permission has been granted. You do not sit in his company under
any circumstances. Understood? There is much more to be learned. My
office of Quaestor, for example, comes under the classification of Free
Citizen, but carries certain of the prerogatives of Privilege."

The Quaestor glared at the men to make sure they understood. "This
barracks is your temporary home. I have drawn up a chart to show which
men sweep, which wash, and so forth. You may question me at anytime; but
foolish or impertinent questions can be punished by mutilation or death.
Just remember that you are the lowest of the low. If you bear that in
mind, you might be able to stay alive."

The Quaestor stood in silence for a few moments. Then he said, "Over the
next few days, you'll all be given various assignments. Some of you
will go to the germanium mines, some to the fishing fleet, some will be
apprenticed to various trades. In the meantime, you're free to look
around Tetrahyde."

When the men looked blank, the Quaestor explained, "Tetrahyde is the
name of the city you're in. It's the largest city on Omega." He thought
for a moment. "In fact, it's the only city on Omega."

"What does the name Tetrahyde mean?" Joe asked.

"How should I know?" the Quaestor said, scowling. "I suppose it's one of
those old Earth names the skrenners are always coming up with. Anyhow,
just watch your step when you enter it."

"Why?" Barrent asked.

The Quaestor grinned. "That, peon, is something you'll have to find out
for yourself." He turned and strode from the barracks.

When he had gone, Barrent went to the window. From it he could see a
deserted square and, beyond, the streets of Tetrahyde.

"You thinking of going out there?" Joe asked.

"Certainly I am," Barrent said. "Coming with me?"

The little credit thief shook his head. "I don't think it's safe."

"Foeren, how about you?"

"I don't like it either," Foeren said. "Might be better to stay around
the barracks for a while."

"That's ridiculous," Barrent said. "It's _our_ city now. Isn't anyone
coming with me?"

Looking uncomfortable, Foeren hunched his big shoulders and shook his
head. Joe shrugged and lay back on his cot. The rest of the new men
didn't even look up.

"Very well," Barrent said. "I'll give you a full report later." He
waited a moment longer in case someone changed his mind, then went out
the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

The city of Tetrahyde was a collection of buildings sprawled along a
narrow peninsula which jutted into a sluggish gray sea. The peninsula's
landward side was contained by a high stone wall, pierced with gates and
guarded by sentries. Its largest building was the Arena, used once a
year for the Games. Near the Arena was a small cluster of government
buildings.

Barrent walked along the narrow streets, staring around him, trying to
get some idea of what his new home was like. The winding, unpaved roads
and dark, weatherbeaten houses stirred an elusive tag-end of memory in
him. He had seen a place like this on Earth, but he couldn't remember
anything about it. The recollection was as tantalizing as an itch; but
he couldn't locate its source.

Past the Arena, he came into the main business district of Tetrahyde.
Fascinated, he read the store signs: UNLICENSED DOCTOR--ABORTIONS
PERFORMED WHILE-U-WAIT. Further on, DISBARRED LAWYER. POLITICAL PULL!

This seemed vaguely wrong to Barrent. He walked further, past stores
advertising stolen goods, past a little shop that announced: MIND
READING! FULL STAFF OF SKRENNING MUTANTS! YOUR PAST ON EARTH REVEALED!

Barrent was tempted to go in. But he remembered that he hadn't any
money; and Omega seemed like the sort of place that put a high value on
money.

He turned down a side street, walked by several restaurants, and came to
a large building called THE POISON INSTITUTE (_Easy Terms. Up to 3 Years
to Pay. Satisfaction Guaranteed or Your Money Back_). Next door to it
was THE ASSASSIN'S GUILD, _Local 452_.

On the basis of the indoctrination talk on the prison ship, Barrent had
expected Omega to be dedicated to the rehabilitation of criminals. To
judge by the store signs, this simply wasn't so; or if it was,
rehabilitation took some very strange forms. He walked on more slowly,
deep in thought.

Then he noticed that people were moving out of his way. They glanced at
him and ducked in doorways and stores. An elderly woman took one look at
him and ran.

What was wrong? Could it be his prison uniform? No, the people of Omega
had seen many of those. What was it, then?

The street was almost deserted. A shopkeeper near him was hurriedly
swinging steel shutters over his display of fencing equipment.

"What's the matter?" Barrent asked him. "What's going on?"

"Are you out of your head?" the shopkeeper said. "It's Landing Day!"

"I beg your pardon?"

"Landing Day!" the shopkeeper said. "The day the prison ship landed. Get
back to your barracks, you idiot!"

He slammed the last steel shutter into place and locked it. Barrent felt
a sudden cold touch of fear. Something was very wrong. He had better get
back in a hurry. It had been stupid of him not to find out more about
Omegan customs before....

Three men were walking down the street toward him. They were well
dressed, and each wore the small golden Hadji earring in his left ear.
All three men carried sidearms.

Barrent started to walk away from them. One of the men shouted, "Stop,
peon!"

Barrent saw that the man's hand was dangling near his gun. He stopped
and said, "What's the matter?"

"It's Landing Day," the man said. He looked at his friends. "Well, who
gets him first?"

"We'll choose."

"Here's a coin."

"No, a show of fingers."

"Ready? One, two, three!"

"He's mine," said the Hadji on the left. His friends moved back as he
drew his sidearm.

"Wait!" Barrent called out. "What are you doing?"

"I'm going to shoot you," the man said.

"But why?"

The man smiled. "Because it's a Hadji privilege. On every Landing Day,
we have the right to shoot down any new peon who leaves his barracks
area."

"But I wasn't told!"

"Of course not," the man said. "If you new men were told, none of you
would leave your barracks on Landing Day. And that would spoil all the
fun."

He took aim.

Barrent reacted instantaneously. He threw himself to the ground as the
Hadji fired, heard a hiss, and saw a jagged heatburn score the brick
building next to which he had been standing.

"My turn now," one of the men said.

"Sorry, old man, I believe it's mine."

"Seniority, dear friend, has its privileges. Stand clear."

Before the next man could take aim, Barrent was on his feet and running.
The sharply winding street protected him for the moment, but he could
hear the sounds of his pursuers behind him. They were running at an easy
stride, almost a fast walk, as if they were completely sure of their
prey. Barrent put on a burst of speed, turned down a side street, and
knew immediately he had made a mistake. He was facing a dead end. The
Hadjis, moving at an easy pace, were coming up behind him.

Barrent looked wildly around. Store fronts here were all locked and
shuttered. There was nowhere he could climb to, no place to hide.

And then he saw an open door halfway down the block in the direction of
his pursuers. He had run right by it. A sign protruding from the
building above the doorway said THE VICTIM'S PROTECTIVE SOCIETY. That's
for me, Barrent thought.

He sprinted for it, running almost under the noses of the startled
Hadjis. A single gun blast scorched the ground under his heels; then he
had reached the doorway and flung himself inside.

He scrambled to his feet. His pursuers had not followed him; he could
still hear their voices in the street, amiably arguing questions of
precedence. Barrent realized he had entered some sort of sanctuary.

He was in a large, brightly lighted room. Several ragged men were
sitting on a bench near the door, laughing at a private joke. A little
further down, a dark-haired girl sat and watched Barrent with wide,
unblinking green eyes. At the far end of the room was a desk with a man
sitting behind it. The man beckoned to Barrent.

He walked up to the desk. The man behind it was short and bespectacled.
He smiled encouragingly, waiting for Barrent to speak.

"This is the Victim's Protective Society?" Barrent asked.

"Quite correct, sir," the man said. "I am Rondolp Frendlyer, president
of this nonprofit organization. Could I be of service?"

"You certainly could," Barrent said. "I'm practically a victim."

"I knew that just by looking at you," Frendlyer said, smiling warmly.
"You have a certain _victim_ look; a mixture of fear and uncertainty
with just a suggestion of vulnerability thrown in. It's quite
unmistakable."

"That's very interesting," Barrent said, glancing toward the door and
wondering how long his sanctuary would be respected. "Mr. Frendlyer, I'm
not a member of your organization--"

"That doesn't matter," Frendlyer said. "Membership in our group is
necessarily spontaneous. One joins when the occasion arises. Our
intention is to protect the inalienable rights of all victims."

"Yes, sir. Well, there are three men outside trying to kill me."

"I see," Mr. Frendlyer said. He opened a drawer and took out a large
book. He flipped through it quickly and found the reference he wanted.
"Tell me, did you ascertain the status of these men?"

"I believe they were Hadjis," Barrent said. "Each of them had a little
gold earring in his left ear."

"Quite right," Mr. Frendlyer said. "And today is Landing Day. You came
off the ship that landed today, and have been classified a peon. Is that
correct?"

"Yes, it is," Barrent said.

"Then I'm happy to say that everything is in order. The Landing Day Hunt
ends at sundown. You can leave here with knowledge that everything is
correct and that your rights are in no way being violated."

"Leave here? After sundown, you mean."

Mr. Frendlyer shook his head and smiled sadly. "I'm afraid not.
According to the law, you must leave here at once."

"But they'll kill me!"

"That's very true," Frendlyer said. "Unfortunately, it can't be helped.
A victim, by definition, is one who is to be killed."

"I thought this was a protective organization."

"It is. But we protect _rights_, not victims. Your rights are not being
violated. The Hadjis have the privilege of killing you on Landing Day,
at any time before sundown, if you are not in your barracks area. You, I
might add, have the right to kill anyone who tries to kill you."

"I don't have a weapon," Barrent said.

"Victims never do," Frendlyer said. "It makes all the difference,
doesn't it? But weapon or not, I'm afraid you'll have to leave now."

Barrent could still hear the Hadjis' lazy voices in the street. He
asked, "Have you a rear door?"

"Sorry."

"Then I'll simply not leave."

Still smiling, Mr. Frendlyer opened a drawer and took out a gun. He
pointed it at Barrent, and said, "You really must leave. You can take
your chances with the Hadjis, or you can die right here with no chance
at all."

"Lend me your gun," Barrent said.

"It isn't allowed," Frendlyer told him. "Can't have victims running
around with weapons, you know. It would upset things." He clicked off
the safety. "Are you leaving?"

Barrent calculated his chances of diving across the desk for the gun,
and decided he would never make it. He turned and walked slowly to the
door. The ragged men were still laughing together. The dark-haired girl
had risen from the bench and was standing near the doorway. As he came
close to her, Barrent noticed that she was very lovely. He wondered what
crime had dictated her expulsion from Earth.

As he passed her, he felt something hard pressed into his ribs. He
reached for it, and found he was holding a small, efficient-looking gun.

"Luck," the girl said. "I hope you know how to use it."

Barrent nodded his thanks. He wasn't sure he knew how; but he was going
to find out.




Chapter Four


The street was deserted except for the three Hadjis, who stood about
twenty yards away, conversing quietly. As Barrent came through the
doorway, two of the men moved back; the third, his sidearm negligently
lowered, stepped forward. When he saw that Barrent was armed he quickly
brought his gun into firing position.

Barrent flung himself to the ground and pressed the trigger of his
unfamiliar weapon. He felt it vibrate in his hand, and saw the Hadji's
head and shoulders turn black and begin to crumble. Before he could take
aim at the other men, Barrent's gun was wrenched violently from his
hand. The Hadji's dying shot had creased the end of the muzzle.

Desperately Barrent dived for the gun, knowing he could never reach it
in time. His skin pricked in expectation of the killing shot. He rolled
to his gun, still miraculously alive, and took aim at the nearest
Hadji.

Just in time, he checked himself from firing. The Hadjis had holstered
their weapons. One of them was saying, "Poor old Draken. He simply could
not learn to take quick aim."

"Lack of practice," the other man said. "Draken never spent much time on
the firing range."

"Well, if you ask me, it's a very good object lesson. One mustn't get
out of practice."

"And," the other man said, "one mustn't underestimate even a peon." He
looked at Barrent. "Nice shooting, fellow."

"Yes, very nice indeed," the other man said. "It's difficult to fire a
handgun accurately while in motion."

Barrent got to his feet shakily, still holding the girl's weapon,
prepared to fire at the first suspicious movement from the Hadjis. But
they weren't moving suspiciously. They seemed to regard the entire
incident as closed.

"What happens now?" Barrent asked.

"Nothing," one of the Hadjis said. "On Landing Day, one kill is all that
any man or hunting party is allowed. After that, you're out of the
hunt."

"It's really a very unimportant holiday," the other man said. "Not like
the Games or the Lottery."

"All that remains for you to do," the first man said, "is to go to the
Registration Office and collect your inheritance."

"My _what_?"

"Your inheritance," the Hadji said patiently. "You're entitled to the
entire estate of your victim. In Draken's case, I'm sorry to say, it
doesn't amount to very much."

"He never was a good businessman," the other said sadly. "Still, it'll
give you a little something to start life with. And since you've made an
authorized kill--even though a highly unusual one--you move upward in
status. You become a Free Citizen."

People had come back into the streets, and shopkeepers were unlocking
their steel shutters. A truck marked BODY DISPOSAL UNIT 5 drove up, and
four uniformed men took away Draken's body. The normal life of Tetrahyde
had begun again. This, more than any assurances from the Hadjis, told
Barrent that the moment for murder was over. He put the girl's weapon in
his pocket.

"The Registration Office is over this way," one of the Hadjis told him.
"We'll act as your witnesses."

Barrent still had only a limited understanding of the situation. But
since things were suddenly going his way, he decided to accept whatever
happened without question. There would be plenty of time later to find
out where he stood.

Accompanied by the Hadjis, he went to the Registration Office on
Gunpoint Square. There a bored clerk heard the entire story, produced
Draken's business papers, and pasted Barrent's name over Draken's.
Barrent noticed that several other names had been pasted over. There
seemed to be a fast turnover of businesses in Tetrahyde.

He found that he was now the owner of an antidote shop at 3 Blazer
Boulevard.

The business papers also officially recognized Barrent's new rank as a
Free Citizen. The clerk gave him a ring of status, made of gunmetal, and
advised him to change into Citizen's clothing as soon as possible if he
wished to avoid unpleasant incidents.

Outside, the Hadjis wished him luck. Barrent decided to see what his new
business was like.

       *       *       *       *       *

Blazer Boulevard was a short alley running between two streets. Near the
middle of it was a store front with a sign which read: ANTIDOTE SHOP.
Beneath that it read: _Specifics for every poison, whether animal,
vegetable, or mineral. Carry our handy Do It Yourself Survival Kit.
Twenty-three antidotes in one pocket-sized container!_

Barrent opened the door and went in. Behind a low counter he saw
ceiling-high shelves stocked with labeled bottles, cans and cartons, and
square glass jars containing odd bits of leaves, twigs, and fungus. In
back of the counter was a small shelf of books with titles like _Quick
Diagnosis in Acute Poisoning Cases_; _The Arsenic Family_; and _The
Permutations of Henbane_.

It was quite obvious that poisoning played a large part in the daily
life of Omega. Here was a store--and presumably there were others--whose
sole purpose was to dispense antidotes. Barrent thought about this and
decided that he had inherited a strange but honorable business. He would
study the books and find out how an antidote shop was run.

The store had a back apartment with a living room, bedroom, and kitchen.
In one of the closets, Barrent found a badly made suit of Citizen black,
into which he changed. He took the girl's weapon from the pocket of his
prison ship uniform, weighed it in his hand for a moment, then put it
into a pocket of his new suit. He left the store and found his way back
to the Victim's Protective Society.

       *       *       *       *       *

The door was still open, and the three ragged men were still sitting on
the bench. They weren't laughing now. Their long wait seemed to have
tired them. At the other end of the room, Mr. Frendlyer was seated
behind his desk, reading through a thick pile of papers. There was no
sign of the girl.

Barrent walked to the desk, and Frendlyer stood up to greet him.

"My congratulations!" Frendlyer said. "Dear fellow, my very warmest
congratulations. That was a splendid bit of shooting. And in motion,
too!"

"Thank you," Barrent said. "The reason I came back here--"

"I know why," Frendlyer said. "You wished to be advised of your rights
and obligations as a Free Citizen. What could be more natural? If you
take a seat on that bench, I'll be with you in--"

"I didn't come here for that," Barrent said. "I want to find out about
my rights and obligations, of course. But right now, I want to find that
girl."

"Girl?"

"She was sitting on the bench when I came in. She was the one who gave
me the gun."

Mr. Frendlyer looked astonished. "Citizen, you must be laboring under a
misapprehension. There has been no woman in this office all day."

"She was sitting on the bench near those three men. A very attractive
dark-haired girl. You must have noticed her."

"I would certainly have noticed her if she had been here," Frendlyer
said, winking. "But as I said before, no woman has entered these
premises today."

Barrent glared at him and pulled the gun out of his pocket. "In that
case, how did I get this?"

"I lent it to you," Frendlyer said. "I'm glad you were able to use it
successfully, but now I would appreciate its return."

"You're lying," Barrent said, taking a firm grip on the weapon. "Let's
ask those men."

He walked over to the bench with Frendlyer close behind him. He caught
the attention of the man who had been sitting nearest the girl and asked
him, "Where did the girl go?"

The man lifted a sullen, unshaven face and said, "What girl you talking
about, Citizen?"

"The one who was sitting right here."

"I didn't notice nobody. Rafeel, you see a female on this bench?"

"Not me," Rafeel said. "And I been sitting here continuous since ten
this morning."

"I didn't see her neither," the third man said. "And I got sharp eyes."

Barrent turned back to Frendlyer. "Why are you lying to me?"

"I've told you the simple truth," Frendlyer said. "There has been no
girl in here all day. I lent you the gun, as is my privilege as
President of the Victim's Protective Society. I would now appreciate its
return."

"No," Barrent said. "I'm keeping the gun until I find the girl."

"That might not be wise," Frendlyer said. He hastily added, "Thievery, I
mean, is not condoned under these circumstances."

"I'll take my chances on that," Barrent said. He turned and left the
Victim's Protective Society.




Chapter Five


Barrent needed time to recuperate from his violent entry into Omegan
life. Starting from the helpless state of a newborn, he had moved
through murder to the ownership of an antidote shop. From a forgotten
past on a planet called Earth, he had been catapulted into a dubious
present in a world full of criminals. He had gotten a glimpse of a
complex class structure, and a hint of an institutionalized program of
murder. He had discovered in himself a certain measure of self-reliance,
and a surprising quickness with a gun. He knew there was a great deal
more to find out about Omega, Earth, and himself. He hoped he would live
long enough to make the necessary discoveries.

First things first. He had to earn a living. To do so, he had to find
out about poisons and antidotes.

He moved into the apartment in back of his store and began reading the
books left by the late Hadji Draken.

The literature on poisons was fascinating. There were the vegetable
poisons known on Earth, such as hellebore, setterwort, deadly
nightshade, and the yew tree. He learned about the action of
hemlock--its preliminary intoxication and its final convulsions. There
was prussic acid poisoning from almonds and digitalin poisoning from
purple foxglove. There was the awesome efficiency of wolfsbane with its
deadly store of aconite. There were the fungi such as the amanita
toadstools and fly agaric, not to mention the purely Omegan vegetable
poisons like redcup, flowering lily, and amortalis.

But the vegetable poisons, although dismayingly numerous, were only
one part of his studies. He had to consider the animals of Earth,
sea, and air, the several species of deadly spiders, the snakes,
scorpions, and giant wasps. There was an imposing array of metallic
poisons such as arsenic, mercury, and bismuth. There were the commoner
corrosives--nitric, hydrochloric, phosphoric, and sulphuric acid. And
there were the poisons distilled or extracted from various sources,
among which were strychnine, formic acid, hyoscyamine, and belladonna.

Each of the poisons had one or more antidotes listed; but those
complicated, cautiously worded formulas, Barrent suspected, were
frequently unsuccessful. To make matters more difficult, the efficacy of
an antidote seemed to depend upon a correct diagnosis of the poisoning
agent. And too often the symptoms produced by one poison resembled those
of another.

Barrent pondered these problems while he studied his books. In the
meantime, with considerable nervousness, he served his first customers.

He found that many of his fears were ungrounded. In spite of the dozens
of lethal substances recommended by the Poison Institute, most poisoners
stuck single-mindedly to arsenic or strychnine. They were cheap, sure,
and very painful. Prussic acid had a readily discernible odor, mercury
was difficult to introduce into the system, and the corrosives, although
gratifyingly spectacular, were dangerous to the user. Wolfsbane and fly
agaric were excellent, of course; deadly nightshade could not be
discounted, and the amanita toadstool had its own macabre charm. But
these were the poisons of an older, more leisurely age. The impatient
younger generation--and especially the women, who made up nearly 90 per
cent of the poisoners on Omega--were satisfied with plain arsenic or
strychnine, as the occasion and opportunity demanded.

Omegan women were conservatives. They simply weren't interested in the
never-ending refinements of the poisoner's art. Means didn't interest
them; only ends, as quickly and as cheaply as possible. Omegan women
were noted for their common sense. Although the eager theoreticians at
the Poison Institute tried to sell dubious mixtures of Contact Poison or
Three Day Mold, and worked hard to put across complex, haywire schemes
involving wasps, concealed needles, and double glasses, they found few
takers among women. Simple arsenic and fast-acting strychnine continued
to be the mainstays of the poison trade.

This quite naturally simplified Barrent's work. His remedies--immediate
regurgitation, lavage, neutralizing agent--were easy enough to master.

He encountered some difficulty with men who refused to believe they had
been poisoned by anything so commonplace as arsenic or strychnine. For
those cases, Barrent prescribed a variety of roots, herbs, twigs,
leaves, and a minute homeopathic dose of poison. But he invariably
preceded these with regurgitation, lavage, and neutralizing agent.

After he was settled, Barrent received a visit from Danis Foeren and
Joe. Foeren had a temporary job on the docks unloading fishing boats.
Joe had organized a nightly pokra game among the government workers of
Tetrahyde. Neither man had moved much in status; with no kills to their
credit, they had progressed only as far as Second Class Resident. They
were nervous about meeting socially with a Free Citizen, but Barrent put
them at ease. They were the only friends he had on Omega, and he had no
intention of losing them over a question of social position.

Barrent was unable to learn very much from them about the laws and
customs of Tetrahyde. Even Joe hadn't been able to find out anything
definite from his friends in government service. On Omega, the law was
kept secret. Older residents used their knowledge of the law to enforce
their rule over the newcomers. This system was condoned and reinforced
by the doctrine of the inequality of all men, which lay at the heart of
the Omegan legal system. Through planned inequality and enforced
ignorance, power and status remained in the hands of the older
residents.

Of course, all social movement upward couldn't be stopped. But it could
be retarded, discouraged, and made exceedingly dangerous. The way one
encountered the laws and customs of Omega was through a risky process of
trial and error.

Although the Antidote Shop took up most of his time, Barrent persisted
in his efforts to locate the girl. He was unable to find a hint that she
even existed.

He became friendly with the shopkeepers on either side of him. One of
them, Demond Harrisbourg, was a jaunty, moustached young man who
operated a food store. It was a mundane and slightly ridiculous line of
work; but, as Harrisbourg explained, even criminals must eat. And this
necessitated farmers, processors, packagers, and food stores.
Harrisbourg contended that his business was in no way inferior to the
more indigenous Omegan industries centered around violent death.
Besides, Harrisbourg's wife's uncle was a Minister of Public Works.
Through him, Harrisbourg expected to receive a murder certificate. With
this all-important document, he could make his six-months kill and move
upward to the status of Privileged Citizen.

Barrent nodded his agreement. But he wondered if Harrisbourg's wife, a
thin, restless woman, wouldn't decide to poison him first. She appeared
to be dissatisfied with her husband; and divorce was forbidden on Omega.

His other neighbor, Tem Rend, was a lanky, cheerful man in his early
forties. He had a heat scar which ran from just beneath his left ear
down almost to the corner of his mouth, a souvenir given him by a
status-seeking hopeful. The hopeful had picked on the wrong man. Tem
Rend owned a weapon shop, practiced constantly, and always carried the
articles of his trade with him. According to witnesses, he had performed
the counterkill in exemplary fashion. Tem's dream was to become a member
of the Assassin's Guild. His application was on file with that ancient
and austere organization, and he had a chance of being accepted within
the month.

Barrent bought a sidearm from him. On Rend's advice, he chose a
Jamiason-Tyre needlebeam. It was faster and more accurate than any
projectile weapon, and it transmitted the same shock-power as a heavy
caliber bullet. To be sure, it hadn't the spread of heat weapons such as
the Hadjis used, which could kill within six inches of their target. But
wide-range beamers encouraged inaccuracy. They were messy, careless
weapons which reinforced careless traits. Anyone could fire a heat gun;
but to use a needlebeam effectively, you had to practice constantly. And
practice paid off. A good needlebeam man was more than a match for any
two widebeam gunmen.

Barrent took this advice to heart, coming, as it did, from an apprentice
assassin and the owner of a weapon shop. He put in long hours on Rend's
cellar firing range, sharpening his reflexes, getting used to the
Quik-Thro holster.

There was a lot to do and a tremendous amount to learn, just in order to
survive. Barrent didn't mind hard work as long as it was for a
worthwhile goal. He hoped things would stay quiet for a while so he
could catch up to the older inhabitants.

But things never stayed quiet in Omega.

One day, late in the afternoon as he was closing up, Barrent received an
unusual-looking caller. He was a man in his fifties, heavy-set, with a
stern, swarthy face. He wore a red ankle-length robe and sandals. Around
his waist was a rawhide belt from which dangled a small black book and a
red-handled dagger. There was an air of unusual force and authority
about him. Barrent was unable to tell his status.

Barrent said, "I was just closing up, sir. But if there's anything you
wish to buy--"

"I did not come here to buy," the caller said. He permitted himself a
faint smile. "I came here to sell."

"Sell?"

"I am a priest," the man said. "You are a newcomer to my district. I
haven't noticed you at services."

"I hadn't known anything about--"

The priest held up his hand. "Under both the sacred and the profane law,
ignorance is no excuse for nonperformance of one's duties. Indeed,
ignorance can be punished as an act of willful neglect, based upon the
Total Personal Responsibility Act of '23, to say nothing of the Lesser
Codicil." He smiled again. "However, there is no question of
chastisement for you as yet."

"I'm glad to hear that, sir," Barrent said.

"'Uncle' is the proper form of address," the priest said. "I am Uncle
Ingemar, and I have come to tell you about the orthodox religion of
Omega, which is the worship of that pure and transcendent spirit of Evil
which is our inspiration and our comfort."

Barrent said, "I'll be very happy to hear about the religion of Evil,
Uncle. Shall we go into the living room?"

"By all means, Nephew," the priest said, and followed Barrent to the
apartment in back of the store.




Chapter Six


"Evil," the priest said, after he had settled comfortably into Barrent's
best chair, "is that force within us which inspires men to acts of
strength and endurance. The worship of Evil is essentially the worship
of oneself, and therefore the only true worship. The self which one
worships is the ideal social being; the man content in his niche in
society, yet ready to grasp any opportunity for advancement; the man who
meets death with dignity, who kills without the demeaning vice of pity.
Evil is cruel, since it is a true reflection of the uncaring and
insensate universe. Evil is eternal and unchanging, although it comes to
us in the many forms of protean life."

"Would you care for a little wine, Uncle?" Barrent asked.

"Thank you, that's very thoughtful," Uncle Ingemar said. "How is
business?"

"Fair. A little slow this week."

"People don't take the same interest in poisoning," the priest said,
moodily sipping his drink. "Not like when I was a boy, newly unfrocked
and shipped out from Earth. However. I was speaking to you about Evil."

"Yes, Uncle."

"We worship Evil," Uncle Ingemar said, "in the incarnate form of The
Black One, that horned and horrid specter of our days and nights. In The
Black One we find the seven cardinal sins, the forty felonies, and the
hundred and one misdemeanors. There is no crime that The Black One has
not performed--faultlessly, as befits his nature. Therefore we imperfect
beings model ourselves upon his perfections. And sometimes, The Black
One rewards us by appearing before us in the awful beauty of his fiery
flesh. Yes, Nephew, I have actually been privileged to see him. Two
years ago he appeared at the conclusion of the Games, and he also
appeared the year before that."

The priest brooded for a moment over the divine appearance. Then he
said, "Since we recognize in the State man's highest potential for Evil,
we also worship the State as a suprahuman, though less than divine,
creation."

Barrent nodded. He was having a difficult time staying awake. Uncle
Ingemar's low, monotonous voice lecturing about so commonplace a thing
as Evil had a soporific effect on him. He struggled to keep his eyes
open.

"One might well ask," Uncle Ingemar droned on, "if Evil is the highest
attainment of the nature of man, why then did The Black One allow any
Good to exist in the universe? The problem of Good has bothered the
unenlightened for ages. I will now answer it for you."

"Yes, Uncle?" Barrent said, surreptitiously pinching himself on the
inside of the thigh in an effort to stay awake.

"But first," Uncle Ingemar said, "let us define our terms. Let us
examine the nature of Good. Let us boldly and fearlessly stare our great
opponent in the face and discover the true lineaments of his features."

"Yes," Barrent said, wondering if he should open a window. His eyes felt
incredibly heavy. He rubbed them hard and tried to pay attention.

"Good is a state of illusion," said Uncle Ingemar in his even,
monotonous voice, "which ascribes to man the nonexistent attributes of
altruism, humility, and piety. How can we recognize Good as being an
illusion? Because there is only man and The Black One in the universe,
and to worship The Black One is to worship the ultimate expression of
oneself. Thus, since we have proven Good to be an illusion, we
necessarily recognize its attributes as nonexistent. Understood?"

Barrent didn't answer.

"Do you understand?" the priest asked more sharply.

"Eh?" Barrent said. He had been dozing with his eyes open. He forced
himself awake and managed to say, "Yes, Uncle, I understand."

"Excellent. Understanding that, we ask, why did The Black One allow even
the illusion of Good to exist in an Evil universe? And the answer is
found in the Law of Necessary Opposites; for Evil could not be
recognized as such without something to contrast it with. The best
contrast is an opposite. And the opposite of Evil is Good." The priest
smiled triumphantly. "It's so simple and clear-cut, isn't it?"

"It certainly is, Uncle," Barrent said. "Would you like a little more
wine?"

"Just the tiniest drop," the priest said.

He talked to Barrent for another ten minutes about the natural and
charming Evil inherent in the beasts of the field and forest, and
counseled Barrent to pattern his behavior on those simple-minded
creatures. At last he rose to leave.

"I'm very glad we could have this little chat," the priest said, warmly
shaking Barrent's hand. "Can I count on your appearance at our Monday
night services?"

"Services?"

"Of course," Uncle Ingemar said. "Every Monday night--at midnight--we
hold Black Mass at the Wee Coven on Kirkwood Drive. After services, the
Ladies Auxiliary usually puts out a snack, and we have community dancing
and choir singing. It's all very jolly." He smiled broadly. "You see,
the worship of evil _can_ be fun."

"I'm sure it can," Barrent said. "I'll be there, Uncle."

He showed the priest to the door. After locking up, he thought carefully
about what Uncle Ingemar had said. No doubt about it, attendance at
services was necessary. Compulsory, in fact. He just hoped that the
Black Mass wouldn't be as infernally dull as Ingemar's exposition of
Evil.

That was Friday. Barrent was kept busy over the next two days. He
received a shipment of homeopathic herbs and roots from his agent in the
Bloodpit district. It took the better part of a day to sort and classify
them, and another day to store them in the proper jars.

On Monday, returning to his shop after lunch, Barrent thought he saw
the girl. He hurried after her, but lost her in the crowd.

When he got back to his store, Barrent found that a letter had been
slipped under his door. It was an invitation from his neighborhood Dream
Shop. The letter read:

     Dear Citizen, We take this opportunity of welcoming you into
     the neighborhood and extending to you the services of what we
     believe to be the finest Dream on Omega.

     All manner and type of dreams are available to you--and at a
     surprisingly low cost. We specialize in memory-resurrecting
     dreams of Earth. You can be assured that your neighborhood
     Dream Shop offers you only the finest in vicarious living.

     As a Free Citizen, you will surely wish to avail yourself of
     these services. May we hope that you do so within the week?

     The Proprietors.

Barrent put down the letter. He had no idea what a Dream Shop was, or
how the dreams were produced. He would have to find out. Even though the
invitation was graciously worded, it had a peremptory tone to it. Past a
doubt, a visit to a Dream Shop was one of the obligations of a Free
Citizen.

But of course, an obligation could be a pleasure, too. The Dream Shop
sounded interesting. And a genuine memory-resurrection dream of Earth
would be worth almost any price the proprietors wished to ask.

But that would have to wait. Tonight was Black Mass, and his attendance
there was definitely required.

Barrent left his store at eleven o'clock in the evening. He wanted time
for a stroll around Tetrahyde before going to the service, which began
at midnight.

He started his walk with a definite sense of well-being. And yet,
because of the irrational and unexpecting nature of Omega, he almost
died before reaching the Wee Coven on Kirkwood Drive.




Chapter Seven


It had turned into a hot, almost suffocatingly humid night when Barrent
began his walk. Not the faintest breath of air stirred along the
darkened streets. Although he was wearing only a black mesh shirt,
shorts, gunbelt, and sandals, Barrent felt as if he were wrapped in a
thick blanket. Most of the people of Tetrahyde, except for those already
at the Covens, had retired to the coolness of their cellars. The dark
streets were nearly deserted.

Barrent walked on, more slowly. The few people he met were running to
their homes. There was a sense of panic in that silent, dogged sprint
through heat which made walking difficult. Barrent tried to find out
what the matter was, but no one would stop. One old man shouted over his
shoulder, "Get off the street, idiot!"

"Why?" Barrent asked him.

The old man snarled something unintelligible and hurried on.

Barrent kept on walking, nervously fingering the butt of his
needlebeam. Something was certainly wrong, but he had no idea what it
was. His nearest shelter now was the Wee Coven, about half a mile away.
It seemed best to keep on moving in that direction, staying alert,
waiting to see what was wrong.

In a few minutes, Barrent was alone in a tightly shuttered city. He
moved into the center of the street, loosened the needlebeam in its
holster, and prepared for attack from any side. Perhaps this was some
special holiday like Landing Day. Perhaps Free Citizens were fair game
tonight. Anything seemed possible on a planet like Omega.

He thought he was ready for any possibility. But when the attack came,
it was from an unexpected quarter.

A faint breeze stirred the stagnant air. It faded and returned, stronger
this time, perceptibly cooling the hot streets. Wind rolled off the
mountains of the interior and swept through the streets of Tetrahyde,
and Barrent could feel the perspiration on his chest and back begin to
dry.

For a few minutes, the climate of Tetrahyde was as pleasant as anything
he could imagine.

Then the temperature continued to fall.

It dropped rapidly. Frigid air swept in from the distant mountain
slopes, and the temperature fell through the seventies into the sixties.

This is ridiculous, Barrent thought to himself. I'd better get to the
Coven.

He walked more rapidly, while the temperature plummeted. It passed
through the forties into the low thirties. The first glittering signs of
frost appeared on the streets.

It can't go much lower, Barrent thought.

But it could. An angry winter wind blew through the streets, and the
temperature dropped into the twenties. Moisture in the air began forming
into sleet.

Chilled to the bone, Barrent ran down the empty streets, and the wind,
rising to gale force, pulled and tugged at him. The streets glittered
with ice, making the footing dangerous. He skidded and fell, and had to
run at a slower pace to keep his footing. And still the temperature
dropped, and the wind growled and snapped like an angry beast.

He saw light through a heavily shuttered window. He stopped and pounded
at the shutters, but no sound came from inside. He realized that the
people of Tetrahyde never helped anyone; the more who died, the more
chance there was for the survivors. So Barrent continued running, on
feet that felt like chunks of wood.

The wind shrieked in his ear, and hailstones the size of his fist pelted
the ground. He was getting too tired to run. All he could do now was
walk, through a frozen white world, and hope he would reach the Wee
Coven.

He walked for hours or for years. At one corner he passed the bodies of
two men huddled against a wall and covered with frost. They had stopped
running and had frozen to death.

Barrent forced himself to run again. A stitch in his side felt like a
knife wound, and the cold was creeping up his arms and down his legs.
Soon the cold would reach his chest, and that would be the end.

A flurry of hailstones stunned him. Without conscious transition he
found that he was lying on the icy ground, and a monstrous wind was
whirling away the tiny warmth his body was able to generate.

At the far end of the block he could see the tiny red light of the
Coven. He crept toward it on hands and knees, moving mechanically, not
really expecting to get there. He crawled forever, and the beckoning red
light always remained the same distance from him.

But he kept on crawling, and at last he reached the door of the Coven.
He pulled himself to his feet and turned the doorknob.

The door was locked.

He pounded feebly on the door. After a moment, a panel slid back. He saw
a man staring at him; then the panel slid shut. He waited for the door
to open. It didn't open. Minutes passed, and still it didn't open. What
were they waiting for inside? What was wrong? Barrent tried to pound on
the door again, lost his balance and fell to the ground. He rolled over
and looked despairingly at the locked door. Then he lost consciousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he came to, Barrent found himself lying on a couch. Two men were
massaging his arms and legs, and beneath him he could feel the warmth of
heating pads. Peering anxiously at him was the broad, swarthy face of
Uncle Ingemar.

"Feeling better now?" Uncle Ingemar asked.

"I think so," Barrent said. "Why did you take so long opening the door?"

"We almost didn't open it at all," the priest told him. "It's against
the law to aid strangers in distress. Since you hadn't as yet joined the
Coven, you were technically still a stranger."

"Then why did you let me in?"

"My assistant noticed that we had an even number of worshipers. We
require an odd number, preferably ending in three. Where the sacred and
the profane laws are in conflict, the profane must yield. So we let you
in despite the government ruling."

"It's a ridiculous ruling," Barrent said.

"Not really. Like most of the laws of Omega, it is designed to keep the
population down. Omega is an extremely barren planet, you know. The
constant arrival of new prisoners keeps swelling the population, to the
enormous disadvantage of the older inhabitants. Ways and means must be
sought to dispose of the excess newcomers."

"It isn't fair," Barrent said.

"You'll change your mind when you become an older inhabitant," Ingemar
said. "And by your tenacity, I'm sure you'll become one."

"Maybe," Barrent said. "But what happened? The temperature must have
dropped nearly a hundred degrees in fifteen minutes."

"A hundred and eight degrees to be exact," Uncle Ingemar said. "It's
really very simple. Omega is a planet which revolves eccentrically
around a double star system. Further instability, I'm told, comes from
the planet's peculiar physical make-up--the placement of mountains and
seas. The result is a uniformly and dramatically bad climate
characterized by sudden violent temperature changes."

The assistant, a small, self-important fellow, said, "It has been
calculated that Omega is at the outer limits of the planets which can
support human life without gross artificial aids. If the fluctuations
between hot and cold were any more violent, all human life here would
be wiped out."

"It's the perfect punitive world," Uncle Ingemar said proudly.
"Experienced residents sense when a temperature change is about to take
place and get indoors."

"It's--hellish," Barrent said, at a loss for words.

"That describes it perfectly," the priest said. "It _is_ hellish, and
therefore perfect for the worship of The Black One. If you're feeling
better now, Citizen Barrent, shall we proceed with services?"

Except for a touch of frostbite on his toes and fingers, Barrent was all
right. He nodded, and followed the priest and the worshipers into the
main part of the Coven.

       *       *       *       *       *

After what he had been through, the Black Mass was necessarily an
anticlimax. In his warmly heated pew, Barrent drowsed through Uncle
Ingemar's sermon on the necessary performance of everyday evil.

The worship of Evil, Uncle Ingemar said, should not be reserved solely
for Monday nights. On the contrary! The knowledge and performance of
evil should suffuse one's daily life. It was not given to everyone to be
a great sinner; but no one should be discouraged by that. Little acts of
badness performed over a lifetime accumulated into a sinful whole most
pleasing to The Black One. No one should forget that some of the
greatest sinners, even the demoniac saints themselves, often had humble
beginnings. Did not Thrastus start as a humble shopkeeper, cheating his
customers of a portion of rice? Who would have expected that simple man
to develop into the Red Slayer of Thorndyke Lane? And who could have
imagined that Dr. Louen, son of a dockhand, would one day become the
world's foremost authority on the practical applications of torture?
Perseverance and piety had allowed those men to rise above their natural
handicaps to a pre-eminent position at the right hand of The Black One.
And it proved, Uncle Ingemar said, that Evil was the business of the
poor as well as the rich.

That ended the sermon. Barrent awoke momentarily when the sacred symbols
were brought out and displayed to the reverent congregation--a
red-handled dagger, and a plaster toad. Then he dozed again through the
slow inscribing of the magical pentagon.

At last the ceremony neared its end. The names of the interceding evil
demons were read--Bael, Forcas, Buer, Marchocias, Astaroth, and
Behemoth. A prayer was read to ward off the effects of Good. And Uncle
Ingemar apologized for not having a virgin to sacrifice on the Red
Altar.

"Our funds were not sufficient," he said, "for the purchase of a
government-certified peon virgin. However, I am sure we will be able to
perform the full ceremony next Monday. My assistant will now pass among
you...."

The assistant carried around the black-rimmed collection plate. Like the
other worshipers, Barrent contributed generously. It seemed wise to do
so. Uncle Ingemar was clearly annoyed at not having a virgin to
sacrifice. If he became a little angrier, he might take it into his head
to sacrifice one of the congregation, virgin or not.

Barrent didn't stay for the choir singing or the community dancing. When
the evening worship was finished, he poked his head cautiously out the
door. The temperature had gone up to the seventies, and the frost was
already melted from the ground. Barrent shook hands with the priest and
hurried home.




Chapter Eight


Barrent had had enough of Omega's shocks and surprises. He stayed close
to his store, worked at his business, and kept alert for trouble. He was
beginning to develop the Omegan look: a narrow, suspicious squint, a
hand always near gun butt, feet ready to sprint. Like the older
inhabitants, he was acquiring a sixth sense for danger.

At night, after the doors and windows were barred and the triplex alarm
system had been set, Barrent would lie on his bed and try to remember
Earth. Probing into the misty recesses of his memory, he found
tantalizing hints and traces, and fragments of pictures. Here was a
great highway curving toward the sun; a fragment of a huge, multi-level
city; a closeup view of a starship's curving hull. But the pictures were
not continuous. They existed for the barest fraction of a second, then
vanished.

On Saturday, Barrent spent the evening with Joe, Danis Foeren, and his
neighbor Tem Rend. Joe's pokra had prospered, and he had been able to
bribe his way to the status of Free Citizen. Foeren was too blunt and
straightforward for that; he had remained at the Residency level. But
Tem Rend promised to take the big forger as an assistant if the
Assassin's Guild accepted his application.

The evening started pleasantly enough; but it ended, as usual, with an
argument about Earth.

"Now look," Joe said, "we all know what Earth is like. It's a complex of
gigantic floating cities. They're built on artificial islands in the
various oceans--"

"No, the cities are on land," Barrent said.

"On water," Joe said. "The people of Earth have returned to the sea.
Everyone has special oxygen adaptors for breathing salt water. The land
areas aren't even used any more. The sea provides everything that--"

"It isn't like that," Barrent said. "I remember huge cities, but they
were all on land."

Foeren said, "You're both wrong. What would Earth want with cities? She
gave them up centuries ago. Earth is a landscaped park now. Everyone has
his own home and several acres of land. All the forests and jungles have
been allowed to grow back. People live _with_ nature instead of trying
to conquer it. Isn't that right, Tem?"

"Almost but not quite," Tem Rend said. "There are still cities, but
they're underground. Tremendous underground factories and production
areas. The rest is like Foeren said."

"There aren't any more factories," Foeren insisted stubbornly. "There's
no need of them. Any goods which a man requires can be produced by
thought-control."

"I'm telling you," Joe said, "I can remember the floating cities! I used
to live in the Nimui sector on the island of Pasiphae."

"You think that proves anything?" Rend asked. "I remember that I worked
on the eighteenth underground level of Nueva Chicaga. My work quota was
twenty days a year. The rest of the time I spent outdoors in the
forests--"

Foeren said, "That's wrong, Tem. There aren't any underground levels. I
can remember distinctly that my father was a Controller, Third Class.
Our family used to trek several hundred miles every year. When we needed
something, my father would _think_ it, and there it'd be. He promised to
teach me how, but I guess he never did."

Barrent said, "Well, a couple of us are certainly having false recall."

"That's certain," Joe said. "But the question is, which of us is right?"

"We'll never find out," Rend said, "unless we can return to Earth."

That ended the discussion.

Toward the end of the week, Barrent received another invitation from the
Dream Shop, more strongly worded than the first. He decided to discharge
the obligation that evening. He checked the temperature, and found that
it had risen into the high nineties. Wiser now in Omegan ways, he packed
a small satchel full of cold-weather clothing, and started out.

The Dream Shop was located in the exclusive Death's Row section. Barrent
went in, and found himself in a small, sumptuously furnished waiting
room. A sleek young man behind a polished desk gave him an artificial
smile.

"Could I be of service?" the young man asked. "My name is Nomis J.
Arkdragen, assistant manager in charge of nightside dreams."

"I'd like to know something about what happens," Barrent said. "How one
gets dreams, what kind of dreams, all that sort of thing."

"Of course," Arkdragen said. "Our service is easily explained,
Citizen--"

"Barrent. Will Barrent."

Arkdragen nodded and checked a name from a list in front of him. He
looked up and said, "Our dreams are produced by the action of drugs upon
the brain and the central nervous system. There are many drugs which
produce the desired effect. Among the most useful are heroin, morphine,
opium, coca, hemp, and peyote. All those are Earth products. Found only
on Omega are Black Slipper, nace, manicee, tri-narcotine, djedalas, and
the various products of the carmoid group. Any and all of these are
dream-inducers."

"I see," Barrent said. "Then you sell drugs."

"Not at all!" Arkdragen said. "Nothing so simple, nothing so crude. In
ancient times on Earth, men administered drugs to themselves. The dreams
which resulted were necessarily random in nature. You never knew what
you would dream about, or for how long. You never knew if you would have
a dream or a nightmare, a horror or a delight. This uncertainty has been
removed from the modern Dream Shop. Nowadays, our drugs are carefully
measured, mixed, and metered for each individual. There is an absolute
precision in dream-making, ranging from the Nirvana-like calm of Black
Slipper through the multicolored hallucinations of peyotl and
tri-narcotine, to the sexual fantasies induced by nace and morphine,
and at last to the memory-resurrecting dreams of the carmoid group."

"It's the memory-resurrecting dreams I'm interested in," Barrent said.

Arkdragen frowned. "I wouldn't recommend it for a first visit."

"Why not?"

"Dreams of Earth are apt to be more unsettling than any imaginary
productions. It's usually advisable to build up a tolerance for them. I
would advise a nice little sexual fantasy for your first visit. We have
a special sale on sexual fantasies this week."

Barrent shook his head. "I think I'd prefer the real thing."

"You wouldn't," the assistant manager said, with a knowing smile.
"Believe me, once one becomes accustomed to vicarious sex experiences,
the real thing is pallid by comparison."

"Not interested," Barrent said. "What I want is a dream about Earth."

"But you haven't built up a tolerance!" Arkdragen said. "You aren't even
addicted."

"Is addiction necessary?"

"It's important," Arkdragen told him, "as well as being inescapable. All
our drugs are habit-forming, as the law requires. You see, to really
appreciate a drug, you must build up a need for it. It heightens
pleasure enormously, to say nothing of the increase in toleration.
That's why I suggest that you begin with--"

"I want a dream about Earth," Barrent said.

"Very well," Arkdragen said grudgingly. "But we will not be responsible
for any traumas which accrue."

He led Barrent into a long passageway. It was lined with doors, and
behind some of them Barrent could hear dull moans and gasps of pleasure.

"Experiencers," Arkdragen said, without further explanation. He took
Barrent to an open room near the end of the corridor. Within sat a
cheerful-looking bearded man in a white coat reading a book.

"Good evening, Doctor Wayn," Arkdragen said. "This is Citizen Barrent.
First visit. He insists upon an Earth dream." Arkdragen turned and left.

"Well," the doctor said, "I guess we can manage that." He put down his
book. "Just lie down over there, Citizen Barrent."

In the center of the room was a long, adjustable table. Above it hung a
complicated-looking instrument. At the end of the room were glass-sided
cabinets filled with square jars; they reminded Barrent of his
antidotes.

He lay down. Doctor Wayn put him through a general examination, then a
specific check for suggestibility, hypnotic index, reactions to the
eleven basic drug groups, and susceptibility to tetanic and epileptic
seizures. He jotted down his results on a pad, checked his figures, went
to a cabinet, and began mixing drugs.

"Is this likely to be dangerous?" Barrent asked.

"It shouldn't be," Doctor Wayn said. "You appear healthy enough. Quite
healthy, in fact, and with a low suggestibility rating. Of course,
epileptic fits _do_ occur, probably because of cumulative allergic
reactions. Can't help that sort of thing. And then there are the
traumas, which sometimes result in insanity and death. They form an
interesting study in themselves. And some people get stuck in their
dreams and are unable to be extricated. I suppose that could be
classified as a form of insanity, although actually it isn't."

The doctor had finished mixing his drugs. He was loading a hypodermic
with the mixture. Barrent was having serious doubts about the
advisability of the whole thing.

"Perhaps I should postpone this visit," he said. "I'm not sure that I--"

"Don't worry about a thing," the doctor said. "This is the finest Dream
Shop on Omega. Try to relax. Tight muscles can result in tetanic
convulsions."

"I think Mr. Arkdragen was right," Barrent said. "Maybe I shouldn't have
a dream about Earth for my first visit. He said it was dangerous."

"Well, after all," the doctor said, "what's life without a little risk?
Besides, the most common damage is brain lesions and burst blood
vessels. And we have full facilities for taking care of that sort of
thing."

He poised the hypodermic over Barrent's left arm.

"I've changed my mind," Barrent said, and started to get off the bed.
Doctor Wayn deftly slid the needle into Barrent's arm.

"One does not change one's mind," he told Barrent, "inside a Dream Shop.
Try to relax...."

Barrent relaxed. He lay back on the bed, and heard a shrill singing in
his ears. He tried to focus on the doctor's face. But the face had
changed.

The face was old, round, and fleshy. Ridges of fat stood out on the chin
and neck. The face was perspiring, friendly, worried.

It was Barrent's 5th Term Advisor.

"Now, Will," the Advisor said, "you must be careful. You must learn to
restrain that temper of yours. Will, you _must_!"

"I know, sir," Barrent said. "It's just that I get so mad at that--"

"Will!"

"All right," Barrent said. "I'll watch myself."

He left the university office and walked into the city. It was a
fantastic city of skyscrapers and multi-level streets, a brilliant city
of silver and diamond hues, an ambitious city which administered a
far-flung network of countries and planets. Barrent walked along the
third pedestrian level, still angry, thinking about Andrew Therkaler.

Because of Therkaler and his ridiculous jealousy, Barrent's application
for the Space Exploration Corps had been turned down. There was nothing
his Advisor could do about the matter; Therkaler had too much influence
on the Selection Board. It would be a full three years before Barrent
could apply again. In the meantime he was Earth-bound and unemployable.
All his studies had been for extraterrestrial exploration. There was no
place for him on Earth; and now he was barred from space.

Therkaler!

Barrent left the pedestrian level and took the highspeed ramp into the
Sante district. As the ramp moved, he fingered the small weapon in his
pocket. Handguns were illegal on Earth. He had procured his through
untraceable means.

He was determined to kill Therkaler.

There was a wash of grotesque faces. The dream blurred. When it cleared,
Barrent found himself aiming his handgun at a thin, cross-eyed fellow
whose scream for mercy was abruptly cut short.

The informer, blank-faced and stern, noted the crime and informed the
police.

The police, in uniforms of gray, took him into custody and brought him
before the judge.

The judge, with his vague parchment face, sentenced him to perpetual
servitude upon the planet Omega, and handed down the obligatory decree
that Barrent be cleansed of memory.

Then the dream turned into a kaleidoscope of horror. Barrent was
climbing a slippery pole, a sheer mountainside, a smooth-sided well.
Behind him, gaining on him, was Therkaler's corpse with its chest ripped
open. Supporting the corpse on either side were the blank-faced informer
and the parchment-faced judge.

Barrent ran down a hill, a street, a rooftop. His pursuers were close
behind him. He entered a dim yellow room, closed and locked the door.
When he turned around, he saw that he had locked himself in with
Therkaler's corpse. Fungus was blossoming in the open wound in the
chest, and the scarred head was crowned with red and purple mold. The
corpse advanced, reached for him, and Barrent dived headfirst through
the window.

"_Come out of it, Barrent. You're overdoing it. Come out of the dream._"

Barrent had no time to listen. The window turned into a chute, and he
slid down its polished sides into an amphitheatre. There, across gray
sand, the corpse crept toward him on the stubs of arms and legs. The
enormous grandstand was empty except for the judge and the informer, who
sat side by side, watching.

"_He's stuck._"

"Well, I warned him...."

"_Come out of the dream, Barrent. This is Doctor Wayn. You're on Omega,
in the Dream Shop. Come out of the dream. There's still time if you pull
yourself out immediately._"

Omega? Dream? There was no time to think about it. Barrent was swimming
across a dark, evil-smelling lake. The judge and the informer were
swimming just behind him, flanking the corpse, whose skin was slowly
peeling away.

"_Barrent!_"

And now the lake was turning into a thick jelly which clung to his arms
and legs and filled his mouth, while the judge and the informer--

"_Barrent!_"

Barrent opened his eyes and found himself on the adjustable bed in the
Dream Shop. Doctor Wayn, looking somewhat shaken, was standing over him.
A nurse was near by with a tray of hypodermics and an oxygen mask.
Behind her was Arkdragen, wiping perspiration from his forehead.

"I didn't think you were going to make it," Doctor Wayn said. "I really
didn't."

"He pulled out just in time," the nurse said.

"I warned him," Arkdragen said, and left the room.

Barrent sat up. "What happened?" he asked.

Doctor Wayn shrugged his shoulders. "It's hard to tell. Perhaps you were
prone to circular reaction; and sometimes the drugs aren't absolutely
pure. But these things usually don't happen more than once. Believe me,
Citizen Barrent, the drug experience is very pleasant. I'm sure you'll
enjoy it the second time."

Still shaken by his experience, Barrent was certain there would be no
second time for him. Whatever the cost, he was not going to risk a
repetition of that nightmare.

"Am I addicted now?" he asked.

"Oh, no," Doctor Wayn said. "Addiction occurs with the third or fourth
visit."

Barrent thanked him and left. He passed Arkdragen's desk and asked how
much he owed.

"Nothing," Arkdragen said. "The first visit is always on the house." He
gave Barrent a knowing smile.

Barrent left the Dream Shop and hurried home to his apartment. He had a
lot to think about. Now, for the first time, he had proof that he was a
willful and premeditated murderer.




Chapter Nine


Being accused of a murder you can't remember is one thing; remembering a
murder you have been accused of is another thing entirely. Such evidence
is hard to disbelieve.

Barrent tried to sort out his feelings on the matter. Before his visit
to the Dream Shop he had never felt himself a murderer, no matter what
the Earth authorities had accused him of. At worst, he had thought that
he might have killed a man in a sudden uncontrollable fit of rage. But
to plan and perform a murder in cold blood....

Why had he done it? Had his lust for revenge been so great as to throw
off all the restraint of Earth's civilization? Apparently so. He had
killed, and someone had informed on him, and a judge had sentenced him
to Omega. He was a murderer on a criminal's planet. To live here
successfully, he simply had to follow his natural bias toward murder.

And yet, Barrent found this extremely difficult to do. He had
surprisingly little taste for bloodshed. On Free Citizen's Day,
although he went into the streets with his needlebeam, he couldn't bring
himself to slaughter any of the lower classes. He didn't want to kill.
It was a ridiculous prejudice, considering where and what he was; but
there it was. No matter how often Tem Rend or Joe lectured him on his
Citizen's duties, Barrent still found murder quite distasteful.

He sought the aid of a psychiatrist, who told him that his rejection of
murder had its roots in an unhappy childhood. The phobia had been
further complicated by the traumatic qualities of his experience in the
Dream Shop. Because of this, murder, the highest social good, had become
repugnant to him. This antimurder neurosis in a man eminently suited for
the art of killing would, the psychiatrist said, inevitably lead to
Barrent's destruction. The only solution was to displace the neurosis.
The psychiatrist suggested immediate treatment in a sanitarium for the
criminally non-murderous.

Barrent visited a sanitarium, and heard the mad inmates screaming about
goodness, fair play, the sanctity of life, and other obscenities. He had
no intention of joining them. Perhaps he was sick, but he wasn't _that_
sick!

His friends told him that his uncooperative attitude was bound to get
him into trouble. Barrent agreed; but he hoped, by killing only when it
became necessary, that he would escape the observation of the highly
placed individuals who administered the law.

For several weeks his plan seemed to work. He ignored the increasingly
peremptory notes from the Dream Shop and did not return to services at
the Wee Coven. Business prospered, and Barrent spent his spare time
studying the effects of the rarer poisons and practicing with his
needlebeam. He often thought about the girl. He still had the gun she
had lent him. He wondered if he would ever see her again.

And he thought about Earth. Since his visit to the Dream Shop, he had
occasional flashes of recall, isolated pictures of a weathered stone
building, a stand of live oaks, the curve of a river seen through
willows. This half-remembered Earth filled him with an almost unbearable
longing. Like most of the citizens of Omega, his only real wish was to
go home.

And that was impossible.

The days passed, and when trouble came, it came unexpectedly. One night
there was a heavy knocking at his door. Half asleep, Barrent answered
it. Four uniformed men pushed their way inside and told him he was under
arrest.

"What for?" Barrent asked.

"Non-drug addiction," one of the men told him. "You have three minutes
to dress."

"What's the penalty?"

"You'll find out in court," the man said. He winked at the other guards
and added, "But the only way to cure a nonaddict is to kill him. Eh?"

Barrent dressed.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was taken to a room in the sprawling Department of Justice. The room
was called the Kangaroo Court, in honor of ancient Anglo-Saxon judicial
proceeding. Across the hall from it, also of antique derivation, was the
Star Chamber. Just past that was the Court of Last Appeal.

The Kangaroo Court was divided in half by a high wooden screen, for it
was fundamental to Omegan justice that the accused should not see his
judge nor any of the witnesses against him.

"Let the prisoner rise," a voice said from behind the screen. The voice,
thin, flat and emotionless, came through a small amplifier. Barrent
could barely understand the words; tone and inflection were lost, as had
been planned for. Even in speaking, the judge remained anonymous.

"Will Barrent," the judge said, "you have been brought before this court
on a major charge of non-drug addiction and a minor charge of religious
impiety. On the minor count we have the sworn statement of a priest. On
the major count we have the testimony of the Dream Shop. Can you refute
either of these charges?"

Barrent thought for a moment, then answered, "No, sir, I can't."

"For the present," the judge said, "your religious impiety can be
waived, since it is a first offense. But non-drug addiction is a major
crime against the state of Omega. The uninterrupted use of drugs is an
enforced privilege of every citizen. It is well known that privileges
must be exercised, otherwise they will be lost. To lose our privileges
would be to lose the very cornerstone of our liberty. Therefore to
reject or otherwise fail to perform a privilege is tantamount to high
treason."

There was a pause. The guards shuffled their feet restlessly. Barrent,
who considered his situation hopeless, stood at attention and waited.

"Drugs serve many purposes," the hidden judge went on. "I need not
enumerate their desirable qualities for the user. But speaking from the
viewpoint of the state, I will tell you that an addicted populace is a
loyal populace; that drugs are a major source of tax revenue; that drugs
exemplify our entire way of life. Furthermore, I say to you that the
nonaddicted minorities have invariably proven hostile to native Omegan
institutions. I give you this lengthy explanation, Will Barrent, in
order that you may better understand the sentence which is to be passed
upon you."

"Sir," Barrent said, "I was wrong in avoiding addiction. I won't plead
ignorance, because I know the law doesn't recognize that excuse. But I
will ask you most humbly for another chance. I ask you to remember, sir,
that addiction and rehabilitation are still possible for me."

"The court recognizes that," the judge said. "For that reason, the court
is pleased to exercise its fullest powers of judicial mercy. Instead of
summary execution, you may choose between two lesser decrees. The first
is punitive; that you shall suffer the loss of your right hand and left
leg in atonement for your crime against the State; but that you shall
not lose your life."

Barrent gulped and asked, "What is the other decree, sir?"

"The other decree, which is nonpunitive, is that you shall undergo a
Trial by Ordeal. And that, if you survive such a trial, you shall be
returned to appropriate rank and position in society."

"I'll take the Trial by Ordeal," Barrent said.

"Very well," said the judge. "Let the case proceed."

Barrent was led from the room. Behind him, he heard a quickly concealed
laugh from one of the guards. Had he chosen wrong? he wondered. Could a
trial by ordeal be worse than outright mutilation?




Chapter Ten


On Omega, so the saying went, you couldn't fit a knife blade between the
trial and the execution of the sentence. Barrent was taken at once to a
large, circular stone room in the basement of the Department of Justice.
White arc lights glared down at him from a high, arched ceiling. Below,
one section of wall had been cut away to provide a reviewing stand for
spectators. The stands were almost filled when Barrent arrived, and
hawkers were selling copies of the day's legal calendar.

For a few moments Barrent was alone on the stone floor. Then a panel
slid away in one curved wall, and a small machine rolled out.

A loudspeaker set high in the reviewing stand announced, "Ladies and
gentlemen, your attention please! You are about to witness Trial
642-BG223, by Ordeal, between Citizen Will Barrent and GME 213. Take
your seats, please. The contest will begin in a few minutes."

Barrent looked over his opponent. It was a glistening black machine
shaped like a half-sphere, standing almost four feet high. It rolled
restlessly back and forth on small wheels. A pattern of red, green, and
amber lights from recessed glass bulbs flashed across its smooth metal
hide. It stirred in Barrent a vague memory of some creature from Earth's
oceans.

"For the benefit of those who are visiting our gallery for the first
time," the loudspeaker said, "a word of explanation is in order. The
prisoner, Will Barrent, has freely chosen the Trial by Ordeal. The
instrument of justice, which in this instance is GME 213, is an example
of the finest creative engineering which Omega has produced. The
machine, or Max, as its many friends and admirers call it, is a murder
weapon of exemplary efficiency, able to utilize no less than
twenty-three killing modes, many of them extremely painful. For trial
purposes, it is set to operate upon a random principle. This means that
Max has no choice over the way in which it kills. The modes are selected
and abandoned by a random arrangement of twenty-three numbers, linked to
an equally random time-selection of one to six seconds."

Max suddenly moved toward the center of the room, and Barrent backed
away from it.

"It is within the prisoner's power," the loudspeaker voice continued,
"to disable the machine; in which case, the prisoner wins the contest
and is set free with full rights and privileges of his station. The
method of disabling varies from machine to machine. It is always
theoretically possible for a prisoner to win. Practically speaking, this
has happened on an average of 3.5 times out of a hundred."

Barrent looked up at the gallery of spectators. To judge by their dress,
they were all men and women of status; high in the ranks of the
Privileged Classes.

Then he saw, sitting in a front row seat, the girl who had lent him her
gun on his first day in Tetrahyde. She was as beautiful as he had
remembered her; but no hint of emotion touched her pale, oval face. She
stared at him with the frank and detached interest of someone watching
an unusual bug under a jar.

"Let the contest begin!" the loudspeaker announced.

Barrent had no more time to think about the girl, for the machine was
rolling toward him.

He circled warily away from it. Max extruded a single slender tentacle
with a white light winking in the end of it The machine rolled toward
Barrent, backing him toward a wall.

Abruptly it stopped. Barrent heard the clank of gears. The tentacle was
withdrawn, and in its place appeared a jointed metal arm which ended in
a knife-edge. Moving more quickly now, the machine cornered him against
the wall. The arm flickered out, but Barrent managed to dodge it. He
heard the knife-edge scrape against stone. When the arm withdrew,
Barrent had a chance to move again into the center of the room.

He knew that his only chance to disable the machine was during the pause
when its selector changed it from one killing mode to another. But how
do you disable a smooth-surfaced turtle-backed machine?

Max came at him again, and now its metal hide glistened with a dull
green substance which Barrent immediately recognized as Contact Poison.
He broke into a spring, circling the room, trying to avoid the fatal
touch.

The machine stopped. Neutralizer washed over its surface, clearing away
the poison. Then the machine was coming toward him again, this time with
no weapons visible, apparently intending to ram.

Barrent was badly winded. He dodged, and the machine dodged with him. He
was standing against the wall, helpless, as the machine picked up speed.

It stopped, inches from him. Its selector clicked. Max was extruding
some sort of a club.

This, Barrent thought, was an exercise in applied sadism. If it went on
much longer, the machine would run him off his feet and kill him at its
leisure. Whatever he was going to do, he had better do it at once, while
he still had the strength.

Even as he thought that, the machine swung a clubbed metal arm. Barrent
couldn't avoid the blow completely. The club struck his left shoulder,
and he felt his arm go numb.

Max was selecting again. Barrent threw himself on its smooth, rounded
back. At the very top he saw two tiny holes. Praying that they were air
intake openings, Barrent plugged them with his fingers.

The machine stopped dead, and the audience roared. Barrent clung to the
smooth surface with his numbed arm, trying to keep his fingers in the
holes. The pattern of lights on Max's surface changed from green through
amber to red. Its deep-throated buzz became a dull hum.

And then the machine extruded tubes as alternative intake holes.

Barrent tried to cover them with his body. But the machine, roaring into
sudden life, swiveled rapidly and threw him off. Barrent rolled to his
feet and moved back to the center of the arena.

The contest had lasted no more than five minutes, but Barrent was
exhausted. He forced himself to retreat from the machine, which was
coming at him now with a broad, gleaming hatchet.

As the hatchet-arm swung, Barrent threw himself _at_ it instead of away.
He caught the arm in both hands and bent it back. Metal creaked, and
Barrent thought he could hear the joint beginning to give way. If he
could break off the metal arm, he might disable the machine; at the very
least, the arm would be a weapon....

Max suddenly went into reverse. Barrent tried to keep his grip on the
arm, but it was yanked away. He fell on his face. The hatchet swung,
gouging his shoulder.

Barrent rolled over and looked at the gallery. He was finished. He might
as well accept the machine's next attempt gracefully and have it over
with. The spectators were cheering, watching Max begin its
transformation into another killing mode.

And the girl was motioning to him.

Barrent stared, trying to make some sense out of it. She gestured at him
to turn something over, turn it over and destroy.

He had no more time to watch. Dizzy from loss of blood, he staggered to
his feet and watched the machine charge. He didn't bother to see what
weapon it had extruded; his entire attention was concentrated on its
wheels.

As it came at him, Barrent threw himself under the wheels.

The machine tried to brake and swerve, but not in time. The wheels
rolled onto Barrent's body, tilting the machine sharply upward. Barrent
grunted under the impact. With his back under the machine, he put his
remaining strength in an attempt to stand up.

For a moment the machine teetered, its wheels spinning wildly. Then it
flipped over on its back. Barrent collapsed beside it.

When he could see again, the machine was still on its back. It was
extruding a set of arms to turn itself over.

Barrent threw himself on the machine's flat belly and hammered with his
fists. Nothing happened. He tried to pull off one of the wheels, and
couldn't. Max was propping itself up, preparing to turn over and resume
the contest.

The girl's motions caught Barrent's eye. She was making a plucking
motion, repeatedly, insistently.

Only then Barrent saw a small fuse box near one of the wheels. He yanked
off the cover, losing most of a fingernail in the process, and removed
the fuse.

The machine expired gracefully.

Barrent fainted.




Chapter Eleven


On Omega, the law is supreme. Hidden and revealed, sacred and profane,
the law governs the actions of all citizens, from the lowest of the low
to the highest of the high. Without the law, there could be no
privileges for those who made the law; therefore the law was absolutely
necessary. Without the law and its stern enforcement, Omega would be an
unthinkable chaos in which a man's rights could extend only as far and
as long as he personally could enforce them. This anarchy would mean the
end of Omegan society; and particularly, it would mean the end of those
senior citizens of the ruling class who had grown high in status, but
whose skill with a gun had long passed its peak.

Therefore the law was necessary.

But Omega was also a criminal society, composed entirely of individuals
who had broken the laws of Earth. It was a society which, in the final
analysis, stressed individual endeavor. It was a society in which the
lawbreaker was king; a society in which crimes were not only condoned
but were admired and even rewarded; a society in which deviation from
the rules was judged solely on its degree of success.

And this resulted in the paradox of a criminal society with absolute
laws which were meant to be broken.

The judge, still hidden behind his screen, explained all this to
Barrent. Several hours had passed since the end of the Trial by Ordeal.
Barrent had been taken to the infirmary, where his injuries were patched
up. They were minor, for the most part; two cracked ribs, a deep gouge
in his left shoulder, and various cuts and bruises.

"Accordingly," the judge went on, "the law must simultaneously be broken
and not broken. Those who never break a law never rise in status. They
are usually killed off in one way or another, since they lack the
necessary initiative to survive. For those who, like yourself, break
laws, the situation is somewhat different. The law punishes them with
absolute severity--_unless they can get away with it_."

The judge paused. In a thoughtful voice he continued, "The highest type
of man on Omega is the individual who understands the laws, appreciates
their necessity, knows the penalties for infraction, then breaks
them--and succeeds! That, sir, is your ideal criminal and your ideal
Omegan. And that is what you have succeeded in doing, Will Barrent, by
winning the Trial by Ordeal."

"Thank you, sir," Barrent said.

"I wish you to understand," the judge continued, "that success in
breaking the law once does not imply that you will succeed a second
time. The odds are increasingly against you each time you try--just as
the rewards are increasingly greater if you succeed. Therefore I counsel
you not to act rashly upon your new acquisition of knowledge."

"I won't, sir," Barrent said.

"Very well. You are hereby elevated to the status of Privileged Citizen,
with all the rights and obligations which that entails. You are allowed
to keep your business, as before. Furthermore, you are granted a week's
free vacation in the Lake of Clouds region; and you may go on that
vacation with any female of your choice."

"I beg pardon?" Barrent said. "What was that last?"

"A week's vacation," the hidden judge repeated, "with any female of your
choice. It is a high reward, since men outnumber women on Omega by six
to one. You may pick any unmarried woman, willing or unwilling. I will
grant you three days in which to make a choice."

"I don't need three days," Barrent said. "I want the girl who was
sitting in the front row of the spectators' gallery. The girl with black
hair and green eyes. Do you know which one I mean?"

"Yes," the judge said slowly, "I know which one you mean. Her name is
Moera Ermais. I suggest that you choose someone else."

"Is there any reason?"

"No. But you would be much better advised if you selected someone else.
My clerk will be pleased to furnish you with a list of suitable young
ladies. All of them have affidavits of good performance. Several are
graduates of the Women's Institute, which, as you perhaps know, gives a
rigorous two-year course in the geishan arts and sciences. I can
personally recommend your attention to--"

"Moera is the one I want," Barrent said.

"Young man, you err in your judgment."

"I'll have to take that chance."

"Very well," the judge said. "Your vacation starts at nine tomorrow
morning. I sincerely wish you good fortune."

       *       *       *       *       *

Guards escorted Barrent from the judge's chambers, and he was taken back
to his shop. His friends, who had been waiting for the death
announcement, came to congratulate him. They were eager to hear the
complete details of the Trial by Ordeal; but Barrent had learned now
that secret knowledge was the road to power. He gave them only the
sketchiest outline.

There was another cause for celebration that night. Tem Rend's
application had finally been accepted by the Assassin's Guild. As he had
promised, he was taking Foeren on as his assistant.

The following morning, Barrent opened his shop and saw a vehicle in
front of his door. It had been provided for his vacation by the
Department of Justice. Sitting in the back, looking beautiful and very
annoyed, was Moera.

She said, "Are you out of your mind, Barrent? Do you think I have time
for this sort of thing? Why did you pick me?"

"You saved my life," Barrent said.

"And I suppose you think that means I'm interested in you? Well, I'm
not. If you have any gratitude, you'll tell the driver that you've
changed your mind. You can still choose another girl."

Barrent shook his head. "You're the only girl I'm interested in."

"Then you won't reconsider?"

"Not a chance."

Moera sighed and leaned back. "Are you _really_ interested in me?"

"Much more than interested," Barrent said.

"Well," Moera said, "if you won't change your mind, I suppose I'll just
have to put up with you." She turned away; but before she did, Barrent
caught the faintest suggestion of a smile.




Chapter Twelve


The Lake of Clouds was Omega's finest vacation resort. Upon entering the
district, all weapons had to be checked at the main gate. No duels were
allowed under any circumstances. Quarrels were arbitrarily decided by
the nearest barman, and murder was punished by immediate loss of all
status.

Every amusement was available at the Lake of Clouds. There were the
exhibitions such as fencing bouts, bull fighting, and bear baiting.
There were sports like swimming, mountain climbing, and skiing. In the
evenings there was dancing in the main ballroom, behind glass walls
which separated residents from citizens and citizens from the elite.
There was a well-stocked drug bar containing anything the fashionable
addict could desire, as well as a few novelties he might wish to sample.
For the gregarious, there was an orgy every Wednesday and Saturday night
in the Satyr's Grotto. For the shy, the management arranged masked
trysts in the dim passageways beneath the hotel. But most important of
all, there were gently rolling hills and shadowy woods to walk in, free
from the tensions of the daily struggle for existence in Tetrahyde.

Barrent and Moera had adjoining rooms, and the door between them was
unlocked. But on the first night, Barrent did not go through the door.
Moera had given no sign of wanting him to do so; and on a planet where
women have easy and continual access to poisons, a man had to think
twice before inflicting his company where it was not wanted. Even the
owner of an antidote shop had to consider the possibility of not being
able to recognize his own symptoms in time.

On their second day, they climbed high into the hills. They ate a basket
lunch on a grassy incline which sloped away to the gray sea. After they
had eaten, Barrent asked Moera why she had saved his life.

"You won't like the answer," she told him.

"I'd still like to hear it."

"Well, you looked so ridiculously vulnerable that day in the Victim's
Society. I would have helped anyone who looked that way."

Barrent nodded uncomfortably. "What about the second time?"

"By then I suppose I had an interest in you. Not a romantic interest,
you understand. I'm not at all romantic."

"What kind of an interest?" Barrent asked.

"I thought you might be good recruitment material."

"I'd like to hear more about it," Barrent said.

Moera was silent for a while, watching him with unblinking green eyes.
She said, "There's not much I can tell you. I'm a member of an
organization. We're always on the lookout for good prospects. Usually we
screen directly from the prison ships. After that, recruiters like me go
out in search of people we can use."

"What type of people do you look for?"

"Not your type, Will. I'm sorry."

"Why not me?"

"At first I thought seriously about recruiting you," Moera said. "You
seemed like just the sort of person we needed. Then I checked into your
record."

"And?"

"We don't recruit murderers. Sometimes we employ them for specific jobs,
but we don't take them into the organization. There are certain
extenuating circumstances which we recognize; self-defense, for example.
But aside from that, we feel that a man who has committed premeditated
murder on Earth is the wrong man for us."

"I see," Barrent said. "Would it help any if I told you I don't have the
usual Omegan attitude toward murder?"

"I know you don't," Moera said. "If it were up to me, I'd take you into
the organization. But it's not my choice.... Will, are you sure you're a
murderer?"

"I believe I am," Barrent said. "I probably am."

"Too bad," Moera said. "Still, the organization needs high-survival
types, no matter what they did on Earth. I can't promise anything, but
I'll see what I can do. It would help if you could find out more about
why you committed murder. Perhaps there were extenuating
circumstances."

"Perhaps," Barrent said doubtfully. "I'll try to find out."

That evening, just before he went to sleep, Moera opened the adjoining
door and came into his room. Slim and warm, she slipped into his bed.
When he started to speak, she put a hand over his mouth. And Barrent,
who had learned not to question good fortune, kept quiet.

The rest of the vacation passed much too quickly. The subject of the
organization did not come up again; but, perhaps as compensation, the
adjoining door was not closed. At last, late on the seventh day, Barrent
and Moera returned to Tetrahyde.

"When can I see you again?" Barrent asked.

"I'll get in touch with you."

"That's not a very satisfactory arrangement."

"It's the best I can do," Moera said. "I'm sorry, Will. I'll see what I
can do about the organization."

Barrent had to be satisfied with that. When the vehicle dropped him at
his store, he still didn't know where she lived, or what kind of an
organization she represented.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in his apartment, he considered carefully the details of his dream
in the Dream Shop. It was all there: his anger at Therkaler, the illicit
weapon, the encounter, the corpse, and then the informer and the judge.
Only one thing was missing. He had no recollection of the actual murder,
no memory of aiming the weapon and activating it. The dream stopped when
he met Therkaler, and started again after he was dead.

Perhaps he had blocked the moment of actual murder out of his mind; but
perhaps there had been some provocation, some satisfactory reason why
he had killed the man. He would have to find out.

There were only two ways of getting information about Earth. One lay
through the horror-tinged visions of the Dream Shop, and he was
determined not to go there again. The other way was through the services
of a skrenning mutant.

Barrent had the usual distaste for mutants. They were another race
entirely, and their status of untouchability was no mere prejudice. It
was well known that mutants often carried strange and incurable
diseases. They were shunned, and they had reacted to exclusion by
exclusiveness. They lived in the Mutant Quarter, which was almost a
self-contained city within Tetrahyde. Citizens with good sense stayed
away from the Quarter, especially after dark; everyone knew that mutants
could be vindictive.

But only mutants had the skrenning ability. In their misshapen bodies
were unusual powers and talents, odd and abnormal abilities which the
normal man shunned by day but secretly courted by night. Mutants were
said to be in the particular favor of The Black One. Some people felt
that the great art of Black Magic, about which the priests boasted,
could only be performed by a mutant; but one never said so in the
presence of a priest.

Mutants, because of their strange talents, were reputed to remember much
more of Earth than was possible for normal men and women. Not only could
they remember Earth in general, but in particular they could skren the
life-thread of a man backward through space and time, pierce the wall
of forgetfulness and tell what really had happened to him.

Other people believed that mutants had no unusual abilities at all. They
considered them clever rogues who lived off people's credulity.

Barrent decided to find out for himself. Late one night, suitably
cloaked and armed, he left his apartment and went to the Mutant
Quarter.




Chapter Thirteen


Barrent walked through the narrow, twisting streets of the Quarter, one
hand never far from his weapon. He walked among the lame and the blind,
past hydrocephaloid and microcephalous idiots, past a juggler who kept
twelve flaming torches in the air with the aid of a rudimentary third
hand growing out of his chest. There were vendors selling clothing,
charms, and jewelry. There were carts loaded with pungent and
unsanitary-looking food. He walked past a row of brightly painted
brothels. Girls crowded the windows and shrieked at him, and a
four-armed, six-legged woman told him he was just in time for the
Delphian Rites. Barrent turned away from her and almost ran into a
monstrously fat woman who pulled open her blouse to reveal eight
shrunken breasts. He ducked around her, moving quickly past four linked
Siamese quadruplets who stared at him with huge mournful eyes.

Barrent turned a corner and stopped. A tall, ragged old man with a cane
was blocking his way. The man was half-blind; the skin had grown smooth
and hairless over the socket where his left eye should have been. But
his right eye was sharp and fierce under a white eyebrow.

"You wish the services of a genuine skrenner?" the old man asked.

Barrent nodded.

"Follow me," the mutant said. He turned into an alley, and Barrent came
after him, gripping the butt of his needlebeam tightly. Mutants were
forbidden by law to carry arms; but like this old man, most of them had
heavy, iron-headed walking sticks. At close quarters, no one could ask
for a better weapon.

The old man opened a door and motioned Barrent inside. Barrent paused,
thinking about the stories he had heard of gullible citizens falling
into mutant hands. Then he half-drew his needlebeam and went inside.

At the end of a long passageway, the old man opened a door and led
Barrent into a small, dimly lighted room. As his eyes became accustomed
to the dark, Barrent could make out the shapes of two women sitting in
front of a plain wooden table. There was a pan of water on the table,
and in the pan was a fist-sized piece of glass cut into many facets.

One of the women was very old and completely hairless. The other was
young and beautiful. As Barrent moved closer to the table, he saw, with
a sense of shock, that her legs were joined below the knee by a membrane
of scaly skin, and her feet were of a rudimentary fish-tail shape.

"What do you wish us to skren for you, Citizen Barrent?" the young woman
asked.

"How did you know my name?" Barrent asked. When he got no answer, he
said, "All right. I want to find out about a murder I committed on
Earth."

"Why do you want to find out about it?" the young woman asked. "Won't
the authorities credit it to your record?"

"They credit it. But I want to find out why I did it. Maybe there were
extenuating circumstances. Maybe I did it in self-defense."

"Is it really important?" the young woman asked.

"I think so," Barrent said. He hesitated a moment, then took the plunge.
"The fact of the matter is, I have a neurotic prejudice against murder.
I would rather _not_ kill. So I want to find out why I committed murder
on Earth."

The mutants looked at each other. Then the old man grinned and said,
"Citizen, we'll help you all we can. We mutants also have a prejudice
against killing, since it's always someone else killing us. We're all in
favor of citizens with a neurosis against murder."

"Then you'll skren my past?"

"It's not as easy as that," the young woman said. "The skrenning
ability, which is one of a cluster of psi talents, is difficult to use.
It doesn't always function. And when it does function, it often doesn't
reveal what it's supposed to."

"I thought all mutants could look into the past whenever they wanted
to," Barrent said.

"No," the old man told him, "that isn't true. For one thing, not all of
us who are classified mutants are true mutants. Almost any deformity or
abnormality these days is called mutantism. It's a handy term to cover
anyone who doesn't conform to the Terran standard of appearance."

"But some of you are true mutants?"

"Certainly. But even then, there are different types of mutantism. Some
just show radiation abnormalities--giantism, microcephaly, and the like.
Only a few of us possess the slightest psi abilities--although all
mutants claim them."

"Are you able to skren?" Barrent asked him.

"No. But Myla can," he said, pointing to the young woman. "Sometimes she
can."

The young woman was staring into the pan of water, into the faceted
glass. Her pale eyes were open very wide, showing almost all pupil, and
her fish-tailed body was rigidly upright, supported by the old woman.

"She's beginning to see something," the man said. "The water and the
glass are just devices to focus her attention. Myla's good at skrenning,
though sometimes she gets the future confused with the past. That sort
of thing is embarrassing, and it gives skrenning a bad name. It can't be
helped, though. Every once in a while the future is there in the water,
and Myla has to tell what she sees. Last week she told a Hadji he was
going to die in four days." The old man chuckled. "You should have seen
the expression on his face."

"Did she see how he would die?" Barrent asked.

"Yes. By a knife-thrust. The poor man stayed in his house for the entire
four days."

"Was he killed?"

"Of course. His wife killed him. She was a strong-minded woman, I'm
told."

Barrent hoped that Myla wouldn't skren any future for him. Life was
difficult enough without a mutant's predictions to make it worse.

She was looking up from the faceted glass now, shaking her head sadly.
"There's very little I can tell you. I was not able to see the murder
performed. But I skrenned a graveyard, and in it I saw your parents'
tombstone. It was an old tombstone, perhaps twenty years old. The
graveyard was on the outskirts of a place on Earth called Youngerstun."

Barrent reflected a moment, but the name meant nothing to him.

"Also," Myla said, "I skrenned a man who knows about the murder. He can
tell you about it, if he will."

"This man saw the murder?"

"Yes."

"Is he the man who informed on me?"

"I don't know," Myla said. "I skrenned the corpse, whose name was
Therkaler, and there was a man standing near it. That man's name was
Illiardi."

"Is he here on Omega?"

"Yes. You can find him right now in the Euphoriatorium on Little Axe
Street. Do you know where that is?"

"I can find it," Barrent said. He thanked the girl and offered payment,
which she refused to take. She looked very unhappy. As Barrent was
leaving, she called out, "Be careful."

Barrent stopped at the door, and felt an icy chill settle across his
chest. "Did you skren my future?" he asked.

"Only a little," Myla said. "Only a few months ahead."

"What did you see?"

"I can't explain it," she said. "What I saw is impossible."

"Tell me what it was."

"I saw you dead. And yet, you weren't dead at all. You were looking at a
corpse, which was shattered into shiny fragments. But the corpse was
also you."

"What does it mean?"

"I don't know," Myla said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Euphoriatorium was a large, garish place which specialized in
cut-rate drugs and aphrodisiacs. It catered mostly to a peon and
resident clientele. Barrent felt out of status as he shouldered his way
through the crowd and asked a waiter where he could find a man named
Illiardi.

The waiter pointed. In a corner booth, Barrent saw a bald,
thick-shouldered man sitting over a tiny glass of thanapiquita. Barrent
went over and introduced himself.

"Pleased to meet you, sir," Illiardi said, showing the obligatory
respect of a Second Class Resident for a Privileged Citizen. "How can I
be of service?"

"I want to ask you a few questions about Earth," Barrent said.

"I can't remember much about the place," Illiardi said. "But you're
welcome to anything I know."

"Do you remember a man named Therkaler?"

"Certainly," Illiardi said. "Thin fellow. Cross-eyed. As mean a man as
you could find."

"Were you present when he was killed?"

"I was there. It was the first thing I remembered when I got off the
ship."

"Did you see who killed him?"

Illiardi looked puzzled. "I didn't have to see. _I_ killed him."

Barrent forced himself to speak in a calm, steady voice. "Are you sure
of that? Are you absolutely certain?"

"Of course I'm sure," Illiardi said. "And I'll fight any man who tries
to take credit for it. I killed Therkaler, and he deserved worse than
that."

"When you killed him," Barrent asked, "did you see _me_ anywhere
around?"

Illiardi looked at him carefully, then shook his head. "No, I don't
think I saw you. But I can't be sure. Right after I killed Therkaler,
everything goes sort of blank."

"Thank you," Barrent said. He left the Euphoriatorium.




Chapter Fourteen


Barrent had much to think about, but the more he thought, the more he
became confused. If Illiardi had killed Therkaler, why had Barrent been
deported to Omega? If an honest mistake had been made, why hadn't he
been released when the true murderer was discovered? Why had someone on
Earth accused him of a crime he hadn't committed? And why had a false
memory of that crime been superimposed on his mind just beneath the
conscious level?

Barrent had no answers for his questions. But he knew that he had never
felt like a murderer. Now he had proof, of sorts, that he wasn't a
murderer.

The sensation of innocence changed everything for him. He had less
tolerance for Omegan ways, and no interest at all in conforming to a
criminal mode of life. The only thing he wanted was to escape from Omega
and return to his rightful heritage on Earth.

But that was impossible. Day and night, the guardships circled overhead.
Even if there had been some way of evading them, escape would still
have been impossible. Omegan technology had progressed only as far as
the internal combustion engine; the only starships were commanded by
Earth forces.

Barrent continued to work in the Antidote Shop, but his lack of public
spirit was growing apparent. He ignored invitations from the Dream Shop,
and never attended any of the popular public executions. When roving
mobs were formed to have a little fun in the Mutant Quarter, Barrent
usually pleaded a headache. He never joined the Landing Day Hunts, and
he was rude to an accredited salesman from the Torture of the Month
Club. Not even visits from Uncle Ingemar could make him change his
antireligious ways.

He knew he was asking for trouble. He expected trouble, and the
knowledge was strangely exhilarating. After all, there was nothing wrong
in breaking the law on Omega--as long as you could get away with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Within a month, he had a chance to test his decision. Walking to his
shop one day, a man shoved against him in a crowd. Barrent moved away,
and the man grabbed him by a shoulder and pulled him around.

"Who do you think you're pushing?" the man asked. He was short and
stocky. His clothes indicated Privileged Citizen's rank. Five silver
stars on his gunbelt showed his number of authorized kills.

"I didn't push you," Barrent said.

"You lie, you _mutant-lover_."

The crowd became silent when they heard the deadly insult. Barrent
backed away, waiting. The man went for his sidearm in a quick, artistic
draw. But Barrent's needlebeam was out a full half-second before the
man's weapon had cleared his holster.

He drilled the man neatly between the eyes; then, sensing movement
behind him, he swung around.

Two Privileged Citizens were drawing heat guns. Barrent fired, aiming
automatically, dodging behind the protection of a shop front. The men
crumpled. The wooden front buckled under the impact of a projectile
weapon and splinters slashed his hand. Barrent saw a fourth man firing
at him from an alley. He brought the man down with two shots.

And that was that. In the space of a few seconds, he had killed four
men.

Although he didn't think of himself as having a murderer's mentality,
Barrent was pleased and elated. He had fired only in self-defense. He
had given the status-seekers something to think about; they wouldn't be
so quick to gun for him next time. Quite possibly they would concentrate
on easier targets and leave him alone.

When he returned to his shop, he found Joe waiting for him. The little
credit thief had a sour look on his face. He said, "I saw your fancy
gun-work today. Very pretty."

"Thank you," Barrent said.

"Do you think that sort of thing will help you? Do you think you can
just go on breaking the law?"

"I'm getting away with it," Barrent said.

"Sure. But how long do you think you can keep it up?"

"As long as I have to."

"Not a chance," Joe said. "_Nobody_ keeps on breaking the law and
getting away with it. Only suckers believe that."

"They'd better send some good men after me," Barrent said, reloading his
needlebeam.

"That's not how it'll happen," Joe said. "Believe me, Will, there's no
counting the ways they have of getting you. Once the law decides to
move, there'll be nothing you can do to stop it. And don't expect any
help from that girl friend of yours, either."

"Do you know her?" Barrent asked.

"I know everybody," Joe said moodily. "I've got friends in the
government. I know that people have had about enough of you. Listen to
me, Will. Do you want to end up dead?"

Barrent shook his head. "Joe, can you visit Moera? Do you know how to
reach her?"

"Maybe," Joe said. "What for?"

"I want you to tell her something," Barrent said. "I want you to tell
her that I didn't commit the murder I was accused of on Earth."

Joe stared at him. "Are you out of your mind?"

"No. I found the man who actually did it. He's a Second Class Resident
named Illiardi."

"Why spread it around?" Joe asked. "No sense in losing credit for the
kill."

"I didn't murder the man," Barrent said. "I want you to tell Moera. Will
you?"

"I'll tell her," Joe said. "If I can locate her. Look, will you remember
what I've said? Maybe you still have time to do something about it. Go
to Black Mass or something. It might help."

"Maybe I'll do that," Barrent said. "You'll be sure to tell her?"

"I'll tell her," Joe said. He left the Antidote Shop shaking his head
sadly.




Chapter Fifteen


Three days later, Barrent received a visit from a tall, dignified man
who stood as rigidly erect as the ceremonial sword that hung by his
side. The old man wore a high-collared coat, black pants, and gleaming
black boots. From his clothing, Barrent knew he was a high government
official.

"The government of Omega sends you greetings," said the official. "I am
Norins Jay, Sub-Minister of Games. I am here, as required by law, to
inform you personally of your good fortune."

Barrent nodded warily and invited the old man into his apartment. But
Jay, erect and proper, preferred to stay in the store.

"The yearly Lottery drawing was held last night," Jay said. "You,
Citizen Barrent, are one of the prize winners. I congratulate you."

"What is the prize?" Barrent asked. He had heard of the yearly Lottery,
but had only a vague idea of its significance.

"The prize," Jay said, "is honor and fame. Your name inscribed on the
civic rolls. Your record of kills preserved for posterity. More
concretely, you will receive a new government-issue needlebeam and,
afterwards, you will be awarded posthumously the silver sunburst
decoration."

"Posthumously?"

"Of course," Jay said. "The silver sunburst is always awarded after
death. It is no less an honor for that."

"I'm sure it isn't," Barrent said. "Is there anything else?"

"Just one other thing," Jay said. "As a Lottery winner, you will take
part in the symbolic ceremony of the Hunt, which marks the beginning of
the yearly Games. The Hunt, as you may know, personifies our Omegan way
of life. In the Hunt we see all the complex factors of the dramatic rise
and fall from grace, combined with the thrill of the duel and the
excitement of the chase. Even peons are allowed to participate in the
Hunt, for this is the one holiday open to all, and the one holiday that
symbolizes the common man's ability to rise above the restraints of his
status."

"If I understand correctly," Barrent said, "I'm one of the people who
have been chosen to be hunted."

"Yes," Jay said.

"But you said the ceremony is symbolic. Doesn't that mean no one gets
killed?"

"Not at all!" Jay said. "On Omega, the symbol and the thing symbolized
are usually one and the same. When we say a Hunt, we mean a true hunt.
Otherwise the thing would be mere pageantry."

Barrent stopped a moment to consider the situation. It was not a
pleasing prospect. In a man-to-man duel he had an excellent chance of
survival. But the yearly Hunt, in which the entire population of
Tetrahyde took part, gave him no chance at all. He should have been
ready for a possibility like this.

"How was I picked?" he asked.

"By random selection," said Norins Jay. "No other method would be fair
to the Hunteds, who give up their lives for Omega's greater glory."

"I can't believe I was picked purely by chance."

"The selection was random," Jay said. "It was made, of course, from a
list of suitable victims. Not everyone can be a Quarry in a Hunt. A man
must have demonstrated a considerable degree of tenacity and skill
before the Games Committee would think of considering him for selection.
Being Hunted is an honor; it is not one which we confer lightly."

"I don't believe it," Barrent said. "You people in the government were
out to get me. Now, it seems, you've succeeded. It's as simple as that."

"Not at all. I can assure you that none of us in the government bear you
the slightest ill will. You may have heard foolish stories about
vindictive officials, but they simply aren't true. You have broken the
law, but that is no longer the government's concern. Now it is entirely
a matter between you and the law."

Jay's frosty blue eyes flashed when he spoke of the law. His back
stiffened, and his mouth grew firm.

"The law," he said, "is above the criminal and the judge, and rules them
both. The law is inescapable, for an action is either lawful or
unlawful. The law, indeed, may be said to have a life of its own, an
existence quite apart from the finite lives of the beings who
administer it. The law governs every aspect of human behavior;
therefore, to the same extent that humans are lawful beings, the law is
human. And being human, the law has its idiosyncrasies, just as a man
has his. For a citizen who abides by the law, the law is distant and
difficult to find. For those who reject and violate it, the law emerges
from its musty sepulchers and goes in search of the transgressor."

"And that," Barrent said, "is why I was chosen for the Hunt?"

"Of course," Jay said. "If you had not been chosen in that way, the
zealous and never-sleeping law would have selected another means, using
whatever instruments were at its disposal."

"Thanks for telling me," Barrent said. "How long do I have before the
Hunt begins?"

"Until dawn. The Hunt begins then, and ends at dawn of the following
day."

"What happens if I'm not killed?"

Norins Jay smiled faintly. "That doesn't happen often, Citizen Barrent.
I'm sure it need not worry you."

"It happens, doesn't it?"

"Yes. Those who survive the Hunt are automatically enrolled in the
Games."

"And if I survive the Games?"

"Forget it," Jay said in a friendly manner.

"But what if I do?"

"Believe me, Citizen, you won't."

"I still would like to know what happens if I do."

"Those who live through the Games are beyond the law."

"That sounds promising," Barrent said.

"It isn't. The law, even at its most threatening, is still your
guardian. Your rights may be few, but the law guarantees their
observance. It is because of the law that I do not kill you here and
now." Jay opened his hand, and Barrent saw a tiny single-charge weapon.
"The law sets limits, and acts as a modifier upon the behavior of the
lawbreaker and the law enforcer. To be sure, the law now states that you
must die. But all men must die. The law, by its ponderous and
introspective nature, gives you time in which to die. You have a day at
least; and without the law, you would have no time at all."

"What happens," Barrent asked, "if I survive the Games and pass beyond
the law?"

"There is only one thing beyond the law," Norins Jay said reflectively,
"and that is The Black One himself. Those who pass beyond the law belong
to him. But it would be better to die a thousand times than to fall
living into the hands of The Black One."

Barrent had long ago dismissed the religion of The Black One as
superstitious nonsense. But now, listening to Jay's earnest voice, he
began to wonder. There might be a difference between the commonplace
worship of evil and the actual presence of Evil itself.

"But if you have any luck," Jay said, "you will be killed early. Now I
will end the interview with your final instructions."

Still holding the tiny weapon, Jay reached into a pocket with his free
hand and withdrew a red pencil. In a quick, practiced motion he drew the
pencil over Barrent's cheeks and forehead. He was finished before
Barrent had time to recoil.

"That marks you as one of the Hunted," Jay said. "The hunt-marks are
indelible. Here is your government-issue needlebeam." He drew a weapon
from his pocket and put it on the table. "The Hunt, as I told you,
begins at first light of dawn. Anyone may kill you then, except another
Hunted man. You may kill in return. But I suggest that you do so with
the utmost circumspection. The sound and flash of needlebeams have given
many Hunteds away. If you try concealment, be sure you have an exit.
Remember that others know Tetrahyde better than you. Skilled Hunters
have explored all the possible hiding places over the years; many of the
Hunted are trapped during the first hours of the holiday. Good luck,
Citizen Barrent."

Jay walked to the door. He opened it and turned to Barrent again.

"There is, I might add, one barely possible way of preserving both life
and liberty during the Hunt. But, since it is forbidden, I cannot tell
you what it is."

Norins Jay bowed and went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barrent found, after repeated washings, that the crimson hunt-marks on
his face were indeed indelible. During the evening, he disassembled the
government-issue needlebeam and inspected its parts. As he had suspected
the weapon was defective. He discarded it in favor of his own.

He made his preparations for the Hunt, putting food, water, a coil of
rope, a knife, extra ammunition, and a spare needlebeam into a small
knapsack. Then he waited, hoping against all reason that Moera and her
organization would bring him a last-minute reprieve.

But no reprieve came. An hour before dawn, Barrent shouldered his
knapsack and left the Antidote Shop. He had no idea what the other
Hunteds were doing; but he had already decided on a place that might be
secure from the Hunters.




Chapter Sixteen


Authorities on Omega agree that a Hunted man experiences a change of
character. If he were able to look upon the Hunt as an abstract problem,
he might arrive at certain more or less valid conclusions. But the
typical Hunted, no matter how great his intelligence, cannot divorce
emotion from reasoning. After all, _he_ is being hunted. He becomes
panic-stricken. Safety seems to lie in distance and depth. He goes as
far from home as possible; he goes deep into the ground along the
subterranean maze of sewers and conduits. He chooses darkness instead of
light, empty places in preference to crowded ones.

This behavior is well known to experienced Hunters. Quite naturally,
they look first in the dark, empty places, in the underground
passageways, in deserted stores and buildings. Here they find and flush
the Hunted with inexorable precision.

Barrent had thought about this. He had discarded his first instinct,
which was to hide in the intricate Tetrahyde cloaca. Instead, an hour
before dawn, he went directly to the large, brightly lighted building
that housed the Ministry of Games.

When the corridors seemed to be deserted, he entered quickly, read the
directory, and climbed the stairs to the third floor. He passed a dozen
office doors, and finally stopped at the one marked NORINS JAY,
SUB-MINISTER OF GAMES. He listened for a moment, then opened the door
and stepped in.

There was nothing wrong with old Jay's reflexes. Before Barrent was
through the doorway, the old man had spotted the crimson hunt-marks on
his face. Jay opened a drawer and reached into it.

Barrent had no desire to kill the old man. He flung the government-issue
needlebeam at Jay, and caught him full on the forehead. Jay staggered
back against the wall, then collapsed to the floor.

Bending over him, Barrent found that his pulse was strong. He bound and
gagged the sub-minister, and pushed him out of sight under his desk.
Hunting through the drawers, he found a CONFERENCE: DO NOT DISTURB sign.
He hung this outside the door, and locked it. With his own needlebeam
drawn, he sat down behind the desk and awaited events.

Dawn came, and a watery sun rose over Omega. From the window, Barrent
could see the streets filled with people. There was a hectic carnival
atmosphere in the city, and the noise of the holiday celebration was
punctuated by the occasional hiss of a beamer or the flat explosion of a
projectile weapon.

By noon, Barrent was still undetected. He looked through windows, and
found that he had access to the roof. He was glad to have an exit, just
as Jay had suggested.

By mid-afternoon, Jay had recovered consciousness. After struggling with
his bonds for a while, he lay quietly under the desk.

Just before evening, someone knocked at the door. "Minister Jay, may I
come in?"

"Not at the moment," Barrent said, in what he hoped was a fair imitation
of Jay's voice.

"I thought you'd be interested in the statistics of the Hunt," the man
said. "So far, Citizens have killed seventy-three Hunteds, with eighteen
left to go. That's quite an improvement over last year."

"Yes, it is," Barrent said.

"The percentage who hid in the sewer system was larger this year. A few
tried to bluff it out by staying in their homes. We're tracking down the
rest in the usual places."

"Excellent," said Barrent.

"None have made the break so far," the man said. "Strange that Hunteds
rarely think of it. But of course, it saves us from having to use the
machines."

Barrent wondered what the man was talking about. The break? Where was
there to break to? And how would machines be used?

"We're already selecting alternates for the Games," the man added. "I'd
like to have your approval of the list."

"Use your own judgment," Barrent said.

"Yes, sir," the man said. In a moment, Barrent heard his footsteps
moving down the hall. He decided that the man had become suspicious. The
conversation had lasted too long, he should have broken it off earlier.
Perhaps he should move to a different office.

Before he could do anything, there was a heavy pounding at the door.

"Yes?"

"Citizen's Search Committee," a bass voice answered. "Kindly open the
door. We have reason to believe that a Hunted is hiding in there."

"Nonsense," Barrent said. "You can't come in. This is a government
office."

"We can," the bass voice said. "No room, office, or building is closed
to a Citizen on Hunt Day. Are you opening up?"

Barrent had already moved to the window. He opened it, and heard behind
him the sound of men hammering at the door. He fired through the door
twice to give them something to think about; then he climbed out through
the window.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rooftops of Tetrahyde, Barrent saw at once, looked like a perfect
place for a Hunted; therefore they were the last place a Hunted should
be. The maze of closely connected roofs, chimneys, and spires seemed
made to order for a chase; but men were already on the roofs. They
shouted when they saw him.

Barrent broke into a sprint. Hunters were behind him, and others were
closing in from the sides. He leaped a five-foot gap between buildings,
managed to hold his balance on a steeply pitched roof, and scrambled
around the side.

Panic gave him speed. He was leaving the Hunters behind. If he could
keep up the pace for another ten minutes, he would have a substantial
lead. He might be able to leave the roofs and find a better place for
concealment.

Another five-foot gap between buildings came up. Barrent leaped it
without hesitation.

He landed well. But his right foot went completely through rotted
shingles, burying itself to the hip. He braced himself and pulled,
trying to extricate his leg, but he couldn't get a purchase on the
steep, crumbling roof.

"There he is!"

Barrent wrenched at the shingles with both hands. The Hunters were
almost within needlebeam distance. By the time he got his leg out, he
would be an easy target.

He had ripped a three-foot hole in the roof by the time the Hunters
appeared on the next building. Barrent pulled his leg free; then, seeing
no alternative, he jumped into the hole.

For a second he was in the air; then he landed feet-first on a table
which collapsed under him, spilling him to the floor. He got up and saw
that he was in a Hadji-class living room. An old woman sat in a rocking
chair less than three feet away. Her jaw was slack with terror; she kept
on rocking automatically.

Barrent heard the Hunters crossing to the roof. He went through the
kitchen and out the back door, under a tangle of clotheslines and
through a small hedge. Someone fired at him from a second-story window.
Looking up, he saw a young boy trying to aim a heavy heat beamer. His
father had probably forbidden him to hunt in the streets.

Barrent turned into a street, and sprinted until he reached an alley. It
looked familiar. He realized that he was in the Mutant Quarter, not far
from Myla's house.

He could hear the cries of the Hunters behind him. He reached Myla's
house, and found the door unlocked.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were all together--the one-eyed man, the bald old woman, and Myla.
They showed no surprise at his entrance.

"So they picked you in the Lottery," the old man said. "Well, it's what
we expected."

Barrent asked, "Did Myla skren it in the water?"

"There was no need to," the old man said. "It was quite predictable,
considering the sort of person you are. Bold but not ruthless. That's
your trouble, Barrent."

The old man had dropped the obligatory form of address for a Privileged
Citizen; and that, under the circumstances, was predictable, too.

"I've seen it happen year after year," the old man said. "You'd be
surprised how many promising young men like yourself end up in this
room, out of breath, holding a needlebeam as though it weighed a ton
with Hunters three minutes behind them. They expect us to help them, but
mutants like to stay out of trouble."

"Shut up, Dem," the old woman said.

"I guess we have to help you," Dem said. "Myla's decided on it for
reasons of her own." He grinned sardonically. "Her mother and I told her
she was wrong, but she insisted. And since she's the only one of us who
can skren, we must let her have her own way."

Myla said, "Even with us helping you, there's very little chance that
you'll live through the Hunt."

"If I'm killed," Barrent said, "how will your prediction come true?
Remember, you saw me looking at my own corpse, and it was in shiny
fragments."

"I remember," Myla said. "But your death won't affect the prediction. If
it doesn't happen to you in this lifetime, it will simply catch up to
you in a different incarnation."

Barrent was not comforted. He asked, "What should I do?"

The old man handed him an armful of rags. "Put these on, and I'll go to
work on your face. You, my friend, are going to become a mutant."

       *       *       *       *       *

In a short time, Barrent was back on the street. He was dressed in rags.
Beneath them he was holding his needlebeam, and in his free hand was a
begging cup. The old man had worked lavishly with a pinkish-yellow
plastic. Barrent's face was now monstrously swollen at the forehead, and
his nose was flat and spread out almost to the cheekbones. The shape of
his face had been altered, and the livid hunt-marks were hidden.

A detachment of Hunters raced past, barely giving him a glance. Barrent
began to feel more hopeful. He had gained valuable time. The last light
of Omega's watery sun was disappearing below the horizon. Night would
give him additional opportunities, and with any luck he could elude the
Hunters until dawn. After that were the Games, of course; but Barrent
wasn't planning on taking part in them. If his disguise was good enough
to protect him from an entire hunting city, there was no reason why he
should be captured for the Games.

Perhaps, after the holiday was over, he could appear again in Omegan
society. Quite possibly if he managed to survive the Hunt and altogether
escape the Games, he would be especially rewarded. Such a presumptuous
and successful breaking of the law would have to be rewarded....

He saw another group of Hunters coming toward him. There were five in
the group, and with them was Tem Rend, looking somber and proud in his
new Assassin's uniform.

"You!" one of the Hunters shouted. "Have you seen a Quarry pass this
way?"

"No, Citizen," Barrent said, bowing his head respectfully, his
needlebeam ready under his rags.

"Don't believe him," a man said. "These damned mutants never tell us a
thing."

"Come on, we'll find him," another man said. The group moved away, but
Tem Rend stayed behind.

"You sure you haven't seen one of the Hunted go by here?" Rend asked.

"Positive, Citizen," Barrent said, wondering if Rend had recognized him.
He didn't want to kill him; in fact, he wasn't sure he could, for Rend's
reflexes were uncannily fast. Right now, Rend's needlebeam was hanging
loosely from his hand, while Barrent's was already aimed. That
split-second advantage might cancel out Rend's superior speed and
accuracy. But if it came to conclusions, Barrent thought, it would
probably be a tie; in which case, they would more than likely kill each
other.

"Well," Rend said, "if you _do_ see any of the Hunted, tell them not to
disguise themselves as mutants."

"Why not?"

"That trick never works for long," Rend said evenly. "It gives a man
about an hour's grace. Then the informers spot him. Now if _I_ were
being hunted, I might use mutant's disguise. But I wouldn't just sit on
a curbstone with it. I'd make a break out of Tetrahyde."

"You would?"

"Most certainly. A few Hunteds every year escape into the mountains. The
officials won't talk about it, of course, and most citizens don't know.
But the Assassin's Guild keeps complete records of every trick, device,
and escape ever used. It's part of our business."

"That's very interesting," Barrent said. He knew that Rend had seen
through his disguise. Tem was being a good neighbor--though a bad
assassin.

"Of course," Rend said, "it isn't easy to get out of the city. And once
a man's out, that doesn't mean he's clear. There are Hunter patrols to
watch out for, and even worse than that--"

Rend stopped abruptly. A group of Hunters were coming toward them. Rend
nodded pleasantly and walked off.

After the Hunters had passed, Barrent got up and started walking. Rend
had given him good advice. Of course some men would escape from the
city. Life in Omega's barren mountains would be extremely difficult; but
any difficulty was better than death.

If he were able to get by the city gate, he would have to watch for the
hunting patrols. And Tem had mentioned something worse. Barrent
wondered what that was. Special mountain-trained Hunters, perhaps?
Omega's unstable climate? Deadly flora and fauna? He wished Rend had
been able to finish the sentence.

By nightfall he had reached the South Gate. Bent painfully over, he
hobbled toward the guard detachment that blocked his way out.




Chapter Seventeen


There was no trouble with the guards. Whole families of mutants were
streaming out of the city, seeking the protection of the mountains until
the frenzy of the Hunt was over. Barrent attached himself to one of
these groups, and soon he found himself a mile past Tetrahyde, in the
low foothills that curled in a semicircle around the city.

The mutants stopped here and made their camp. Barrent went on, and by
midnight he was starting up the rocky, windswept slope of one of the
higher mountains. He was hungry, but the cool, clear air was
exhilarating. He began to believe that he really would live through the
Hunt.

He heard a noisy group of Hunters making a sweep around the mountain. He
avoided them easily in the darkness, and continued climbing. Soon there
was no sound except the steady rush of wind across the cliffs. It was
perhaps two in the morning; only three more hours until dawn.

In the small hours of the morning it began to rain, lightly at first,
then in a cold torrent. This was predictable weather for Omega.
Predictable also were the towering thunderheads that formed over the
mountains, the rolling thunder, and the vivid yellow flashes of
lightning. Barrent found shelter in a shallow cave, and counted himself
lucky that the temperature had not yet plunged.

He sat in the cave, half-dozing, the remnants of his makeup running down
his face, keeping a sleepy watch over the slope of the mountain below
him. Then, in the brilliant illumination of a lightning flash, he saw
something moving up the slope, heading directly toward his cave.

He stood up, the needlebeam ready, and waited for another lightning
flash. It came, and now he could see the cold, wet gleam of metal, a
flashing of red and green lights, a pair of metal tentacles taking grips
on the rocks and small shrubs of the mountainside.

It was a machine similar to the one Barrent had fought in the cellars of
the Department of Justice. Now he knew what Rend had wanted to warn him
about. And he could see why few of the Hunted escaped, even if they got
beyond the city itself. This time, Max would not be operating at random
to make a more equal contest out of it. And there would be no exposed
fuse box.

As Max came within range, Barrent fired. The blast bounced harmlessly
off the machine's armored hide. Barrent left the shelter of his cave and
began to climb.

The machine came steadily behind him, up the treacherous wet face of the
mountain. Barrent tried to lose it on a plateau of jagged boulders, but
Max couldn't be shaken. Barrent realized that the machine must be
following a scent of some kind; probably it was keyed to follow the
indelible paint on Barrent's face.

On a steep face of the mountain, Barrent rolled boulders onto the
machine, hoping he could start an avalanche. Max dodged most of the
flying rocks, and let the rest bounce off him, with no visible effect.

At last Barrent was backed into a narrow, steep-sided angle of cliff. He
was unable to climb any higher. He waited. When the machine loomed over
him, he held the needlebeam against its metal hide and held down the
trigger.

Max shuddered for a moment under the impact of the needlebeam's full
charge. Then it brushed the weapon away and wrapped a tentacle around
Barrent's neck. The metal coils tightened. Barrent felt himself losing
consciousness. He had time to wonder whether the coils would strangle
him or break his neck.

Suddenly the pressure was gone. The machine had backed away a few feet.
Past it, Barrent could see the first gray light of dawn.

He had lived through the Hunt. The machine was not programmed to kill
him after dawn. But it wouldn't let him go. It kept him captive in the
narrow angle of the cliff until the Hunters came.

They brought Barrent back to Tetrahyde, where a wildly applauding crowd
gave him a hero's welcome. After a two-hour procession, Barrent and four
other survivors were taken to the office of the Awards Committee. The
Chairman made a short and moving speech about the skill and courage each
had shown in surviving the Hunt. He gave each of them the rank of Hadji,
and presented them with the tiny golden earrings which showed their
status.

At the end of the ceremony, the Chairman wished each of the new Hadjis
an easy death in the Games.




Chapter Eighteen


Guards led Barrent from the office of the Awards Committee. He was
brought past a row of dungeons under the Arena, and locked into a cell.
The guards told him to be patient; the Games had already begun, and his
turn would come soon.

There were nine men crammed into a cell which had been built to hold
three. Most of them sat or sprawled in complete and silent apathy,
already resigned to their deaths. But one of them was definitely not
resigned. He pushed his way to the front of the cell as Barrent entered.

"Joe!"

The little credit thief grinned at him. "A sad place to meet, Will."

"What happened to you?"

"Politics," Joe said. "It's a dangerous business on Omega, especially
during the time of the Games. I thought I was safe. But ..." He shrugged
his shoulders. "I was selected for the Games this morning."

"Is there any chance of getting out of it?"

"There's a chance," Joe said. "I told your girl about you, so perhaps
her friends can do something. As for me, I'm expecting a reprieve."

"Is that possible?" Barrent asked.

"Anything is possible. It's better not to hope for it, though."

"What are the Games like?" Barrent asked.

"They're the sort of thing you'd expect," Joe said. "Man-to-man combats,
battles against various types of Omegan flora and fauna, needlebeam and
heatgun duels. It's all copied from an old Earth festival, I'm told."

"And if anyone survives," Barrent said, "they're beyond the law."

"That's right."

"But what does it mean to be beyond the law?"

"I don't know," Joe said. "Nobody seems to know much about that. All I
could find out is, survivors of the Games are taken by The Black One.
It's not supposed to be pleasant."

"I can understand that. Very little on Omega _is_ pleasant."

"It isn't a bad place," Joe said. "You just haven't the proper spirit
of--"

He was interrupted by the arrival of a detachment of guards. It was time
for the occupants of Barrent's cell to enter the Arena.

"No reprieve," Barrent said.

"Well, that's how it goes," Joe said.

They were marched out under heavy guard and lined up at the iron door
that separated the cell block from the main Arena. Just before the
captain of the guards opened the door, a fat, well-dressed man came
hurrying down a side corridor waving a paper.

"What's this?" the captain of the guards asked.

"A writ of recognizance," the fat man said, handing his paper to
the captain. "On the other side, you'll find a cease-and-desist
order." He pulled more papers out of his pockets. "And here is a
bankruptcy-transferral notice, a chattel mortgage, a writ of habeas
corpus, and a salary attachment."

The captain pushed back his helmet and scratched his narrow forehead. "I
can never understand what you lawyers are talking about. What does it
mean?"

"It releases him," the fat man said, pointing to Joe.

The captain took the papers, gave them a single puzzled glance, and
handed them to an aide. "All right," he said, "take him with you. But it
wasn't like this in the old days. _Nothing_ stopped the orderly
progression of the Games."

Grinning triumphantly, Joe stepped through the ranks of guards and
joined the fat lawyer. He asked him, "Do you have any papers for Will
Barrent?"

"None," the lawyer said. "His case is in different hands. I'm afraid it
might not be completely processed until after the Games are over."

"But I'll probably be dead then," Barrent said.

"That, I can assure you, won't stop the papers from being properly
served," the fat lawyer said proudly. "Dead or alive, you will retain
all your rights."

The captain of the guards said, "All right, let's go."

"Luck," Joe called out. And then the line of prisoners had passed
through the iron door into the glaring light of the Arena.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barrent lived through the hand-to-hand duels in which a quarter of the
prisoners were killed. After that, men armed with swords were matched
against the deadlier Omegan fauna. The beasts they fought included the
hintolyte and the hintosced--big-jawed, heavily armored monsters whose
natural habitat was the desert region far to the south of Tetrahyde.
Fifteen men later, these beasts were dead. Barrent was matched with a
Saunus, a flying black reptile from the western mountains. For a while
he was hard-pressed by this ugly, poison-toothed creature. But in time
he figured out a solution. He stopped trying to jab the Saunus's
leathery hide and concentrated on severing its broad fan of
tailfeathers. When he had succeeded, the Saunus's flying balance was
thrown badly off. The reptile crashed into the high wall that separated
the combatants from the spectators, and it was relatively easy to
administer the final stroke through the Saunus's single huge eye. The
vast and enthusiastic crowd in the stadium gave Barrent a lengthy round
of applause.

He moved back to the reserve pen and watched other men struggle against
the trichomotreds, incredibly fast little creatures the size of rats,
with the dispositions of rabid wolverines. It took five teams of
prisoners. After a brief interlude of hand-to-hand duelling, the Arena
was cleared again.

Now the hard-shelled criatin amphibians lumbered in. Although sluggish
in disposition, the criatins were completely protected beneath several
inches of shell. Their narrow whiplash tails, which also served them as
antennae, were invariably fatal to any man who approached them. Barrent
had to fight one of these after it had dispatched four of his fellow
prisoners.

He had watched the earlier combats carefully, and had detected the one
place where the criatin antennae could not reach. Barrent waited for his
chance and jumped for the center of the criatin's broad back.

When the shell split into a gigantic mouth--for this was the criatin
method of feeding--Barrent jammed his sword into the opening. The
criatin expired with gratifying promptness, and the crowd signified its
approval by showering the Arena with cushions.

The victory left Barrent standing alone on the blood-stained sand. The
rest of the prisoners were either dead or too badly maimed to fight.
Barrent waited, wondering what beast the Games Committee had chosen
next.

A single tendril shot up through the sand, and then another. Within
seconds, a short, thick tree was growing in the Arena, sending out more
roots and tendrils, and pulling all flesh, living or dead, into five
small feeding-mouths which circled the base of the trunk. This was the
carrion tree, indigenous to the northeastern swamps and imported with
great difficulty. It was said to be highly vulnerable to fire; but
Barrent had no fire available.

Using his sword two-handed, Barrent lopped off vines; others grew in
their place. He worked with frantic speed to keep the vines from
surrounding him. His arms were becoming tired, and the tree regenerated
faster than he could cut it down. There seemed no way of destroying it.

His only hope lay in the tree's slow movements. These were fast enough,
but nothing compared with human musculature. Barrent ducked out of a
corner in which the creeping vines were trapping him. Another sword was
lying twenty yards away, half-buried in the sand. Barrent reached it,
and heard warning shouts from the crowd. He felt a vine close around his
ankles.

He hacked at it, and other vines coiled around his waist. He dug his
heels into the sand and clashed the swords together, trying to produce a
spark.

On his first try, the sword in his right hand broke in half.

Barrent picked up the halves and kept on trying as the vines dragged him
closer to the feeding mouths. A shower of sparks flew from the clanging
steel. One of them touched a vine.

With incredible suddenness the vine burst into flame. The flame spurted
down the length of the vine to the main tree system. The five mouths
moaned as the fire leaped toward them.

If matters had been left to continue, Barrent would have been burned to
death, for the Arena was nearly filled with the highly combustible
vines. But the flames were endangering the wooden walls of the Arena.
The Tetrahyde guard detachment put the fire out in time to save both
Barrent and the spectators.

Swaying with exhaustion, Barrent stood in the center of the Arena,
wondering what would be used next against him. But nothing happened.
After a moment, a signal was made from the President's box, and the
crowd roared in applause.

The Games were over. Barrent had survived.

Still no one left his seat. The audience was waiting to see the final
disposition of Barrent, who had passed beyond the law.

He heard a low, reverent gasp from the crowd. Turning quickly, Barrent
saw a fiery dot of light appear in mid-air. It swelled, threw out
streamers of light, and gathered them in again. It grew rapidly, too
brilliant to look upon. And Barrent remembered Uncle Ingemar saying to
him, "Sometimes, The Black One rewards us by appearing in the awful
beauty of his fiery flesh. Yes, Nephew, I have actually been privileged
to see him. Two years ago he appeared at the Games, and he also appeared
the year before that...."

The dot became a red and yellow globe about twenty feet in diameter, its
lowest curve not quite touching the ground. It grew again. The center of
the globe became thinner; a waist appeared, and above the waist the
globe turned an impenetrable black. It was two globes now, one
brilliant, one dark, joined by a narrow waist. As Barrent watched, the
dark globe lengthened and changed into the unforgettable horn-headed
shape of The Dark One.

Barrent tried to run, but the huge black-headed figure swept forward and
engulfed him. He was trapped in a blinding swirl of radiance, with
darkness above it. The light bored into his head, and he tried to
scream. Then he passed out.




Chapter Nineteen


Barrent recovered consciousness in a dim, high-ceilinged room. He was
lying on a bed. Two people were standing near by. They seemed to be
arguing.

"There simply isn't any more time to wait," a man was saying. "You fail
to appreciate the urgency of the situation."

"The doctor said he needs at least another three days of rest." It was a
woman's voice. After a moment, Barrent realized that Moera was speaking.

"He can have three days."

"And he needs time for indoctrination."

"You told me he was bright. The indoctrination shouldn't take long."

"It might take weeks."

"Impossible. The ship lands in six days."

"Eylan," Moera said, "you're trying to move too fast. We can't do it
this time. On the next Landing Day we will be much better prepared--"

"The situation will be out of hand by then," the man said. "I'm sorry,
Moera, we have to use Barrent immediately, or not use him at all."

Barrent said, "Use me for what? Where am I? Who are you?"

The man turned to the bed. In the faint light, Barrent saw a very tall,
thin, stooped old man with a wispy moustache.

"I'm glad you're awake," he said. "My name is Swen Eylan. I'm in command
of Group Two."

"What's Group Two?" Barrent asked. "How did you get me out of the Arena?
Are you agents of The Black One?"

Eylan grinned. "Not exactly agents. We'll explain everything to you
shortly. First, I think you'd better have something to eat and drink."

       *       *       *       *       *

A nurse brought in a tray. While Barrent ate, Eylan pulled up a chair
and told Barrent about The Black One.

"Our Group," Eylan said, "can't claim to have started the religion of
Evil. That appears to have sprung up spontaneously on Omega. But since
it was there, we have made occasional use of it. The priests have been
remarkably cooperative. After all, the worshipers of Evil set a high
positive value upon corruption. Therefore, in the eyes of an Omegan
priest, the appearance of a fraudulent Black One is not anathema. Quite
the contrary, for in the orthodox worship of Evil, a great deal of
emphasis is put upon false images--especially if they are big, fiery,
impressive images like the one which rescued you from the Arena."

"How did you produce that?" Barrent asked.

"It has to do with friction surfaces and planes of force," Eylan said.
"You'd have to ask our engineers for more details."

"Why did you rescue me?" Barrent asked.

Eylan glanced at Moera, who shrugged her shoulders. Looking
uncomfortable, Eylan said, "We'd like to use you for an important job.
But before I tell you about it, I think you should know something about
our organization. Certainly you must have some curiosity about us."

"A great deal," Barrent said. "Are you some kind of criminal elite?"

"We're an elite," Eylan said, "but we don't consider ourselves criminal.
Two entirely different types of people have been sent to Omega. There
are the true criminals guilty of murder, arson, armed robbery, and the
like. Those are the people you lived among. And there are the people
guilty of deviational crimes such as political unreliability, scientific
unorthodoxy, and irreligious attitudes. These people compose our
organization, which, for the purposes of identification, we call Group
Two. As far as we can remember and reconstruct, our crimes were largely
a matter of holding different opinions from those which prevailed upon
Earth. We were nonconformists. We probably constituted an unstable
element, and a threat to the entrenched powers. Therefore we were
deported to Omega."

"And you separated yourselves from the other deportees," Barrent said.

"Yes, necessarily. For one thing, the true criminals of Group One are
not readily controllable. We couldn't lead them, nor could we allow
ourselves to be led by them. But more important than that, we had a job
to do that could only be performed in secrecy. We had no idea what
devices the guardships employed to watch the surface of Omega. To keep
our security intact, we went underground--literally. The room you're in
now is about two hundred feet below the surface. We stay out of sight,
except for special agents like Moera, who separate the political and
social prisoners who belong in Group Two from the others."

"You didn't separate me," Barrent said.

"Of course not. You were allegedly guilty of murder, which put you in
Group One. However, your behavior was not typical of Group One. You
seemed like good potential material for us, so we helped you from time
to time. But we had to be sure of you before taking you into the Group.
Your repudiation of the murder charge was strongly in your favor. Also,
we questioned Illiardi after you had located him. There seemed no reason
to doubt that he performed the murder you were charged with. Even more
strongly in your favor were your high survival qualities, which had
their ultimate test in the Hunt and the Games. We were badly in need of
a man of your abilities."

"Just what is your work?" Barrent asked. "What do you want to
accomplish?"

"We want to go back to Earth," Eylan said.

"But that's impossible."

"We don't think so," Eylan said. "We've given the matter considerable
study. In spite of the guardships, we think it's possible to return to
Earth. We'll find out for certain in six days, when the breakout must be
made."

Moera said, "It would be better to wait another six months."

"Impossible. A six months' delay would be ruinous. Every society has a
purpose, and the criminal population of Omega is bent upon its own
self-destruction. Barrent, you look surprised. Couldn't you see that?"

"I never thought about it," Barrent said. "After all, I was part of it."

"It's self-evident," Eylan said. "Consider the institutions--all
centered around legalized murder. The holidays are excuses for mass
murders. Even the law, which governs the rate of murder, is beginning to
break down. The population lives near the edge of chaos. And rightfully
so. There's no longer any security. The only way to live is to kill. The
only way to rise in status is to kill. The only safe thing is to
kill--more and more, faster and faster."

"You exaggerate," Moera said.

"I don't think so. I realize that there seems to be a certain permanence
to Omegan institutions, a certain inherent conservatism even to murder.
But it's an illusion. I have no doubt that all dying societies projected
their illusion of permanence--right up to the end. Well, the end of
Omegan society is rapidly approaching."

"How soon?" Barrent asked.

"An explosion point will be reached in about four months," Eylan said.
"The only way to change that would be to give the population a new
direction, a different cause."

"Earth," Barrent said.

"Exactly. That's why the attempt must be made immediately."

"Well, I don't know much about it," Barrent said. "But I'll go along
with you. I'll gladly be a part of any expedition."

Eylan looked uncomfortable again. "I suppose I haven't made myself
clear," he said. "_You_ are going to be the expedition, Barrent. You and
only you.... Forgive me if I've startled you."




Chapter Twenty


According to Eylan, Group Two had at least one serious flaw: the men who
composed it were, for the most part, past their physical prime. There
were some younger members, of course; but they had had little contact
with violence, and little chance to develop traits of self-sufficiency.
Secure in the underground, most of them had never fired a beamer in
anger, had never been forced to run for their lives, had never
encountered the make-or-break situations through which Barrent had
lived. They were brave but unproven. They would willingly undertake the
expedition to Earth; but they would have little chance of success.

"And you think I would have a chance?" Barrent asked.

"I think so. You're young and strong, reasonably intelligent, and
extremely resourceful. You have a high survival quotient. If any man
could succeed, I believe you could."

"Why one man?"

"Because there's no sense in sending a group. The chance of detection
would simply be increased. By using one man, we get maximum security and
opportunity. If you succeed, we will receive valuable information about
the nature of the enemy. If you don't succeed, if you are captured, your
attempt will be considered the action of an individual rather than a
group. We will still be free to start a general uprising from Omega."

"How am I supposed to get back to Earth?" Barrent asked. "Do you have a
starship hidden away somewhere?"

"I'm afraid not. We plan to transport you to Earth aboard the next
prison ship."

"That's impossible."

"Not at all. We've studied the landings. They follow a pattern. The
prisoners are marched out, accompanied by the guards. While they're
assembled in the square, the ship itself is undefended, although loosely
surrounded by a cordon of guards. To get you aboard, we will start a
disturbance. It should take away the guards' attention long enough for
you to get on board."

"Even if I succeed, I'll be captured as soon as the guards return."

"You shouldn't be," Eylan said, "The prison ship is an immense structure
with many hiding places for a stowaway. And the element of surprise will
be in your favor. This may be the first time in the history of Omega
that an escape has been attempted."

"And when the ship reaches Earth?"

"You will be disguised as a member of the ship's personnel," Eylan said.
"Remember, the inevitable inefficiency of a huge bureaucracy will be
working for you."

"I hope so," Barrent said. "Let's suppose I reach Earth safely and get
the information you want. How do I send it back?"

"You send it back on the next prison ship," Eylan said. "We plan to
capture that one."

Barrent rubbed his forehead wearily. "What makes you think that any of
this--my expedition or your uprising--can succeed against an
organization as powerful as Earth?"

"We have to take the chance," Eylan said. "Take it or go down in a
bloody shambles with the rest of Omega. I agree that the odds are
weighted against us. But our choice is either to make the attempt or to
die without making any attempt at all."

Moera nodded at this. "Also, the situation has other possibilities. The
government of Earth is obviously repressive. That argues the existence
of underground resistance groups on Earth itself. You may be able to
contact those groups. A revolt both here _and_ on Earth would give the
government something to think about."

"Maybe," Barrent said.

"We have to hope for the best," Eylan said. "Are you with us?"

"Certainly," Barrent said. "I'd rather die on Earth than on Omega."

"The prison ship lands in six days," Eylan said. "During that time, we
will give you the information we have about Earth. Part of it is memory
reconstruction, part has been skrenned by the mutants, and the rest is
logical constructs. It's all we have, and I think it gives a reasonably
accurate picture of current conditions on Earth."

"How soon do we start?" Barrent asked.

"Right now," Eylan said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barrent received a general briefing on the physical make-up of Earth,
its climate and major population centers. Then he was sent to Colonel
Bray, formerly of the Earth Deep Space Establishment. Bray talked to him
about the probable military strength of Earth as represented by the
number of guardships around Omega and their apparent level of scientific
development. He gave estimates of the size of the Earth forces, their
probable divisions into land, sea, and space groups, their assumed level
of efficiency. An aide, Captain Carell, lectured on special weapons,
their probable types and ranges, their availability to the general Earth
population. Another aide, Lieutenant Daoud, talked about detection
devices, their probable locations, and how to avoid them.

Then Barrent was turned back to Eylan for political indoctrination. From
him, Barrent learned that Earth was believed to be a dictatorship. He
learned the methods of a dictatorship, its peculiar strengths and
weaknesses, the role of the secret police, the use of terror, the
problem of informers.

When Eylan was finished with him, Barrent went to a small, beady-eyed
man who lectured on Earth's memory-destroying system. Using the premise
that memory-destruction was regularly employed to render opposition
ineffective, the man went on to construct the probable nature of an
underground movement on Earth given those circumstances, and how Barrent
might contact them, and what the underground's capabilities might be.

Finally he was given the full details of Group Two's plan for getting
him on board the ship.

When Landing Day came, Barrent felt a definite sense of relief. He was
heartily sick of day and night cramming. Any sort of action would seem
an improvement.




Chapter Twenty-One


Barrent watched the huge prison ship maneuver into position and sink
noiselessly to the ground. It gleamed dully in the afternoon sun,
tangible proof of Earth's long reach and powerful grasp. A hatch opened,
and a landing stage was let down. The prisoners, flanked by guards,
marched down and assembled in the square.

As usual, most of the population of Tetrahyde had gathered to watch and
cheer the disembarkation ceremony. Barrent moved through the crowd and
stationed himself behind the ranks of prisoners and guards. He touched
his pocket to make sure the needlebeam was still there. It had been made
for him by Group Two fabricators, completely of plastic to escape any
metals detector. The rest of his pockets were stuffed with equipment. He
hoped he wouldn't have to use any of it.

The loudspeaker voice began to read off the prisoners' numbers, as it
had when Barrent had disembarked. He listened, knees slightly bent,
waiting for the beginning of the diversion.

The loudspeaker voice was coming to the end of the prisoner list. There
were only ten left. Barrent edged forward. The voice droned on. Four
prisoners left, three....

As the number of the last prisoner was announced, the diversion began. A
black cloud of smoke darkened the pale sky, and Barrent knew that the
Group had set fire to the empty barracks in Square A-2. He waited.

Then it came. There was a stupendous explosion, blasting through two
rows of empty buildings. The shock wave was staggering. Even before
debris began to fall, Barrent was running toward the ship.

The second and third explosions went off as he came into the ship's
shadow. Quickly he stripped off his Omegan outer garments. Under them,
he wore a facsimile of guard's uniform. Now he ran toward the landing
stage.

The loudspeaker voice was calling loudly for order. The guards were
still bewildered.

The fourth explosion threw Barrent to the ground. He got to his feet
instantly and sprinted up the landing stage. He was inside the ship.
Outside, he could hear the guard captain shouting orders. The guards
were beginning to form into ranks, their weapons ready to use against
the restive crowd. They were retreating to the ship in good order.

Barrent had no more time to listen. He was standing in a long, narrow
corridor. He turned to the right and raced toward the bow of the ship.
Far behind him, he could hear the heavy marching tread of the guards.

Now, he thought, the information he had been given about the ship had
better be right, or the expedition was finished before it began.

He sprinted past rows of empty cells, and came to a door marked GUARD
ASSEMBLY ROOM. A lighted green bulb above the door showed that the air
system was on. He went by it, and came to another door. Barrent tried it
now, and found it unlocked. Within was a room stacked high with spare
engine parts. He entered and closed the door.

The guards marched down the corridor. Barrent could hear them talking as
they entered the assembly room.

"What do you think started those explosions?"

"Who knows? Those prisoners are crazy, anyhow."

"They'd blow up the whole planet, if they could."

"Good riddance."

"Well, it didn't cause any damage. There was an explosion like that
about fifteen years ago. Remember?"

"I wasn't here then."

"Well, it was worse than this. Two guards were killed, and maybe a
hundred prisoners."

"What started it?"

"Don't know. These Omegans just enjoy blowing things up."

"Next thing you know, they'll be trying to blow _us_ up."

"Not a chance. Not with the guardships up there."

"You think so? Well, I'll be glad to get back to the checkpoint."

"You said it. Be good to get off this ship and live a little."

"It isn't a bad life at the checkpoint, but I'd rather go back to
Earth."

"Well, you can't have everything."

The last of the guards entered the assembly room and dogged the door
shut. Barrent waited. After a while, he felt the ship vibrate. It was
beginning its departure.

He had learned some valuable information. Apparently all or most of the
guards got off at the checkpoint. Did that mean that another detachment
of guards got on? Probably. And a checkpoint implied that the ship was
searched for escaped prisoners. It was probably only a perfunctory
search, since no prisoner had escaped in the history of Omega. Still, he
would have to figure out a way of avoiding it.

But he would face that when the time came. Now he felt the vibration
cease, and he knew that the ship had left the surface of Omega. He was
aboard, unobserved, and the ship was on its way to Earth. So far,
everything had gone according to plan.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the next few hours, Barrent stayed in the storage room. He was
feeling very tired, and his joints had begun to ache. The air in the
small room had a sour, exhausted smell. Forcing himself to his feet,
Barrent walked to the air vent and put his hand over it. No air was
coming through. He took a small gauge out of his pocket. The oxygen
content of the room was falling rapidly.

Cautiously he opened the storeroom door and peered out. Although he was
dressed in a perfect replica of guard's uniform, he knew he couldn't
pass among men who knew each other so well. He had to stay in hiding.
And he had to have air.

The corridors were deserted. He passed the guard assembly room and heard
faint murmurs of conversation inside. The green light glowed brightly
over the door. Barrent walked on, beginning to feel the first signs of
dizziness. His gauge showed him that the oxygen content in the corridor
was starting to fall.

The Group had assumed that the air system would be used throughout the
ship. Now Barrent could see that, with only guards and crew aboard,
there was no need to supply air for the entire ship. There would be air
in the little man-inhabited islands of the guardroom and the crew's
section, and nowhere else.

Barrent hurried down the dim, silent corridors, gasping for breath. The
air was rapidly growing bad. Perhaps it was being used in the assembly
room before the ship's main air supply was touched.

He passed unlocked doors, but the green bulbs above them were unlighted.
He had a pounding headache, and his legs felt as if they were turning to
jelly. He tried to figure out a course of action.

The crew's section seemed to offer him the best chance. Ship's personnel
might not be armed. Even if they were, they would be less ready for
trouble than the guards. Perhaps he could hold one of the officers at
gunpoint; perhaps he could take over the ship.

It was worth trying. It had to be tried.

At the end of the corridor he came to a staircase. He climbed past a
dozen deserted levels, and came at last to a stenciled sign on one of
the walls. It read CONTROL SECTION, and an arrow pointed the way.
Barrent took the plastic needlebeam out of his pocket and staggered
down the corridor. He was beginning to lose consciousness. Black shadows
formed and dissipated on the edges of his vision. He was experiencing
vague hallucinations, flashes of horror in which he felt the corridor
walls falling in on him. He found that he was on his hands and knees,
crawling toward a door marked CONTROL ROOM--_No Admittance except to
Ship's Officers._

       *       *       *       *       *

The corridor seemed to be filled with gray fog. It cleared momentarily,
and Barrent realized that his eyes were not focusing properly. He pulled
himself to his feet and turned the door handle. It began to open. He
took a firm grip on the needlebeam and tried to prepare himself for
action.

But, as the door opened, darkness closed irrevocably around him. He
thought he could see startled faces, hear a voice shouting, "Watch out!
He's armed!" And then the blackness closed in completely, and he fell
endlessly forward.




Chapter Twenty-Two


Barrent's return to consciousness was sudden and complete. He sat up and
saw that he had fallen inside the control room. The metal door was
closed behind him, and he was breathing without difficulty. He could see
no sign of the crew. They must have gone after the guards, assuming he
would stay unconscious.

He scrambled to his feet, instinctively picking up his needlebeam. He
examined the weapon closely, then frowned and put it away. Why, he
wondered, would the crew leave him alone in the control room, the most
important part of the ship? Why would they leave him armed?

He tried to remember the faces he had seen just before he collapsed.
They were indistinct memories, vague and unfocused figures with hollow,
dreamlike voices. Had there really been people in here?

The more he thought about it, the more certain he was that he had
conjured those people out of his fading consciousness. There had been no
one here. He was alone in the ship's nerve center.

He approached the main control board. It was divided into ten stations.
Each section had its rows of dials, whose slender indicators pointed to
incomprehensible readings. Each had its switches, wheels rheostats, and
levers.

Barrent walked slowly past the stations, watching the patterns of
flashing lights that ran to the ceiling and rippled along the walls. The
last station seemed to be some kind of overall control for the rest. A
small screen was marked: _Coordination_, _Manual/Automatic_. The
_Automatic_ part was lighted. There were similar screens for navigation,
lookout, collision control, subspace entry and exit, normal space entry
and exit, and landing. All were automatic. Further on he found the
programming screen, which clicked off the progress of the flight in
hours, minutes, and seconds. Time to Checkpoint One was now 29 hours, 4
minutes, 51 seconds. Stop-over time, three hours. Time from Checkpoint
to Earth, 480 hours.

The control board flashed and hummed to itself, serene and
self-sufficient. Barrent couldn't help feeling that the presence of a
human in this temple of the machine was sacrilege.

He checked the air ducts. They were set for automatic feed, giving just
enough air to support the room's present human population of one.

But where was the crew? Barrent could understand the necessity of
operating a starship largely on an automatic programming system. A
structure as huge and complex as this had to be self-sufficient. But men
had built it, and men had punched out the programs. Why weren't men
present to monitor the switchboards, to modify the program when
necessary? Suppose the guards had needed more time on Omega? Suppose it
became necessary to by-pass the checkpoint and return directly to Earth?
Suppose it was imperative to change destination altogether? Who reset
the programs, who gave the ship its orders, who possessed the guiding
intelligence that directed the entire operation?

Barrent looked around the control room. He found a storage bin filled
with oxygen respirators. He put one on, tested it, and went into the
corridor.

After a long walk, he reached a door marked CREW'S QUARTERS. Inside, the
room was neat and bare. The beds stood in neat rows, without sheets or
blankets. There were no clothes in the closets, no personal possessions
of any kind. Barrent left and inspected the officers' and captain's
quarters. He found no sign of recent human habitation.

He returned to the control room. It was apparent now that the ship had
no crew. Perhaps the authorities on Earth felt so certain of their
schedules and of the reliability of their ship that they had decided a
crew was superfluous. Perhaps....

But it seemed to Barrent a reckless way of doing things. There was
something very strange about an Earth that allowed starships to run
without human supervision.

He decided to suspend further judgment until he had acquired more facts.
For the time being, he had to think about the problems of his own
survival. There was concentrated food in his pockets, but he hadn't been
able to carry much water. Would the crewless ship have supplies? He had
to remember the detachment of guards, down below in their assembly
room. And he had to think about what was going to happen at the
checkpoint, and what he would do about it.

Barrent found that he did not have to use his own food supplies. In the
officers' mess, machines still dispensed food and drink at the push of a
button. Barrent didn't know if these were natural or chemically
reconstituted foods. They tasted fine and seemed to nourish him, so he
really didn't care.

He explored part of the ship's upper levels. After becoming lost several
times, he decided not to take any more unnecessary risks. The
life-center of the ship was its control room, and Barrent spent most of
his time there.

He found a viewport. Activating the switch that opened the shutters,
Barrent was able to look out on the vast spectacle of stars glowing in
the blackness of space. Stars without end stretched past the furthest
limits of his imagination. Looking at this, Barrent felt a strong surge
of pride. This was where he belonged, and those unknown stars were his
heritage.

The time to the checkpoint dwindled to six hours. Barrent watched new
portions of the control board come to life, checking and altering the
forces governing the ship, preparing for a landing. Three and a half
hours before landing, Barrent made an interesting discovery. He found
the central communication system for the entire ship. By turning on the
receiving end, he could overhear conversations in the guardroom.

He didn't learn much that was useful to him. Either through caution or
lack of concern, the guards didn't discuss politics. Their lives were
spent on the checkpoint, except for periods of service on the prison
ship. Some of the things they said Barrent found incomprehensible. But
he continued to listen, fascinated by anything these men of Earth had to
say.

"You ever go swimming in Florida?"

"I never liked salt water."

"The year before I was called to the Guards, I won third prize at the
Dayton Orchid Fair."

"I'm buying a retirement villa in Antarctica."

"How much longer for you?"

"Eighteen years."

"Well, someone's got to do it."

"But why me? And why no Earth leaves?"

"You've watched the tapes, you know why. Crime is a disease. It's
infectious."

"So what?"

"So if you work around criminals, you run the danger of infection. You
might contaminate someone on Earth."

"It isn't fair...."

"Can't be helped. Those scientists know what they're talking about.
Besides, checkpoint's not so bad."

"If you like everything artificial ... air, flowers, food...."

"Well, you can't have everything. Your family there?"

"They want to get back Earthside."

"After five years on the checkpoint, they say you can't take Earth. The
gravity gets you."

"I'll take gravity. Any time...."

From these conversations, Barrent learned that the grim-faced guards
were human beings, just like the prisoners on Omega. Most of the guards
didn't seem to like the work they were doing. Like Omegans, they longed
for a return to Earth.

He stored the information away. The ship had reached the checkpoint, and
the giant switchboard flashed and rippled, making its final adjustments
for the intricacies of docking.

At last the maneuver was completed and the engines shut down to
stand-by. Through the communications system, Barrent heard the guards
leave their assembly room. He followed them down the corridors to the
landing stage. He heard the last of them, as he left the ship, say,
"Here comes the check squad. Whatcha say, boys?"

There was no answer. The guards were gone, and there was a new sound in
the corridors: the heavy marching feet of what the guard called the
check squad.

There seemed to be a lot of them. Their inspection began in the engine
rooms, and moved methodically upward. From the sounds, they seemed to be
opening every door on the ship and searching every room and closet.

Barrent held the needlebeam in his perspiring hand and wondered where,
in all the territory of the ship, he could hide. He would have to assume
that they were going to look everywhere. In that case, his best chance
lay in evading them and hiding in a section of the ship already
searched.

He slipped a respirator over his head and moved into the corridor.




Chapter Twenty-Three


Half an hour later, Barrent still hadn't figured out a way of getting
past the check squad. They had finished inspecting the lower levels and
were moving up to the control room deck. Barrent could hear them
marching down the hallways. He kept on walking, a hundred yards in
front, trying to find some way of hiding.

There should be a staircase at the end of this passageway. He could take
it down to a different level, a part of the ship which had already been
searched. He hurried on, wondering if he were wrong about the location
of the staircase. He still had only the haziest idea of the layout of
the ship. If he were wrong, he would be trapped.

He came to the end of the corridor, and the staircase was there. The
footsteps behind him sounded closer. He started down, peering backwards
over his shoulder.

And ran headfirst into a man's huge chest.

Barrent flung himself back, bringing his plastic gun to bear on the
enormous figure. But he stopped himself from firing. The thing that
stood in front of him was not human.

It stood nearly seven feet high, dressed in a black uniform with
INSPECTION TEAM--ANDROID B212 stenciled on its front. Its face was a
stylization of a human's, cleverly sculptured out of putty-colored
plastic. Its eyes glowed a deep, impossible red. It swayed on two legs,
balancing carefully, looking at Barrent, moving slowly toward him.
Barrent backed away, wondering if a needlebeam could stop it.

He never had a chance to find out, for the android walked past him and
continued up the stairs. Stenciled on the back of its uniform were the
words RODENT CONTROL DIVISION. This particular android, Barrent
realized, was programmed only to look for rats and mice. The presence of
a stowaway had made no impression on it. Presumably the other androids
were similarly specialized.

He stayed in an empty storage room on a lower level until he heard the
sounds of the androids leaving. Then he hurried back to the control
room. No guards came aboard. Exactly on schedule, the big ship left the
checkpoint. Destination: Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rest of the journey was uneventful. Barrent slept and ate and,
before the craft entered subspace, watched the endless spectacle of the
stars through the viewport. He tried to visualize the planet he was
coming to, but no pictures formed in his mind. What sort of a people
built huge starships but failed to equip them with a crew? Why did they
send out inspection teams, then give those teams the narrowest and most
specialized sort of vision? Why did they have to deport a sizable
portion of their population--and then fail to control the conditions
under which the deportees lived and died? Why was it necessary for them
to wipe the prisoners' minds clean of all memory of Earth?

Barrent couldn't think of any answers.

The control room clocks moved steadily on, counting off the minutes and
hours of the trip. The ship entered, then emerged from subspace and went
into deceleration orbit around a blue and green world which Barrent
observed with mixed emotions. He found it hard to realize that he was
returning at last to Earth.




Chapter Twenty-Four


The starship landed at noon on a brilliant sunlit day, somewhere on
Earth's North American continent. Barrent had planned on waiting for
darkness before leaving; but the control room screens flashed an ancient
and ironic warning: _All passengers and crew must disembark at once.
Ship rigged for full decontamination procedure. Twenty minutes._

He didn't know what was meant by full decontamination procedure. But
since the crew was emphatically ordered to leave, a respirator might not
provide much safety. Of the two dangers, leaving the ship seemed the
lesser.

The members of Group Two had given a good deal of thought to the
clothing Barrent would wear upon debarkation. Those first minutes on
Earth might be crucial. No cunning could help him if his clothing was
obviously strange, outlandish, alien. Typical Earth clothing was the
answer; but the Group wasn't sure what the citizens of Earth wore. One
part of the Group had wanted Barrent to dress in their reconstructed
approximation of civilian dress. Another part felt that the guard's
uniform he had worn on board would see him through his arrival on Earth
as well. Barrent himself had agreed with a third opinion, which felt
that a mechanic's one-piece coverall would be least noticeable around a
spacefield, and suffer the least change of style over the years. In the
towns and cities, this disguise might put him at a disadvantage; but he
had to meet one problem at a time.

He quickly stripped off his guard's uniform. Underneath he wore the
lightweight coveralls. His needlebeam concealed, a collapsible lunchbox
in his hand, Barrent walked down the corridor to the landing stage. He
hesitated for a moment, wondering if he should leave the weapon on the
ship. He decided not to part with it. An inspection would reveal him
anyhow; with the needlebeam he would have a chance of breaking away from
police.

He took a deep breath and marched out of the ship and down the landing
stage.

There were no guards, no inspection party, no police, no army units and
no customs officials. There was no one at all. Far to one side of the
wide field he could see rows of starcraft glistening in the sun.
Straight ahead of him was a fence, and in it was an open gate.

Barrent walked across the field, quickly but without obvious haste. He
had no idea why it was all so simple. Perhaps the secret police on Earth
had more subtle means of checking on passengers from starships.

He reached the gate. There was no one there except a bald, middle-aged
man and a boy of perhaps ten. They seemed to be waiting for him. Barrent
found it hard to believe that these were government officials; still,
who knew the ways of Earth? He passed through the gate.

The bald man, holding the boy by the hand, walked over to him. "I beg
your pardon," the man said.

"Yes?"

"I saw you come from the starship. Would you mind if I ask you a few
questions?"

"Not at all," Barrent said, his hand near the coverall zipper beneath
which lay his needlebeam. He was certain now that the bald man was a
police agent. The only thing that didn't make sense was the presence of
the child, unless the boy was an agent-in-training.

"The fact of the matter is," the man said, "my boy Ronny here is doing a
thesis for his Tenth Grade Master's Degree. On starships."

"So I wanted to see one," Ronny said. He was an undersized child with a
pinched, intelligent face.

"He wanted to see one," the man explained. "I told him it wasn't
necessary, since all the facts and pictures are in the encyclopedia. But
he wanted to see one."

"It gives me a good opening paragraph," Ronny said.

"Of course," Barrent said, nodding vigorously. He was beginning to
wonder about the man. For a member of the secret police, he was
certainly taking a devious route.

"You work on the ships?" Ronny asked.

"That's right."

"How fast do they go?"

"In real or subspace?" Barrent asked.

This question seemed to throw Ronny off his stride. He pushed out his
lower lip and said, "Gee, I didn't know they went in subspace." He
thought for a moment. "As a matter of fact, I don't think I know what
subspace is."

Barrent and the boy's father smiled understandingly.

"Well," Ronny said, "how fast do they go in real space?"

"A hundred thousand miles an hour," Barrent said, naming the first
figure that came into his head.

The boy nodded, and his father nodded. "Very fast," the father said.

"And much faster in subspace of course," Barrent said.

"Of course," the man said. "Starships are very fast indeed. They have to
be. Quite long distances involved. Isn't that right, sir?"

"Very long distances," Barrent said.

"How is the ship powered?" Ronny asked.

"In the usual way," Barrent told him. "We had triplex boosters installed
last year, but that comes more under the classification of auxiliary
power."

"I've heard about those triplex boosters," the man said. "Tremendous
things."

"They're adequate," Barrent said judiciously. He was certain now that
this man was just what he purported to be: a citizen with no particular
knowledge of spacecraft simply bringing his son to the starport.

"How do you get enough air?" Ronny asked.

"We generate our own," Barrent said. "But air isn't any trouble. Water's
the big problem. Water isn't compressible, you know. It's hard to store
in sufficient quantities. And then there's the navigation problem when
the ship emerges from subspace."

"What _is_ subspace?" Ronny asked.

"In effect," Barrent said, "it's simply a different level of real space.
But you can find all that in your encyclopedia."

"Of course you can, Ronny," the boy's father said. "We mustn't keep the
pilot standing here. I'm sure he has many important things to do."

"I _am_ rather rushed," Barrent said. "Look around all you want. Good
luck on your thesis, Ronny."

Barrent walked for fifty yards, his spine tingling, expecting
momentarily to feel the blow of a needlebeam or a shotgun. But when he
looked back, the father and son were turned away from him, earnestly
studying the great vessel. Barrent hesitated a moment, deeply bothered.
So far, the whole thing had been entirely too easy. Suspiciously easy.
But there was nothing he could do but go on.

The road from the starport led past a row of storage sheds to a section
of woods. Barrent walked until he was out of sight. Then he left the
road and went into the woods. He had had enough contact with people for
his first day on Earth. He didn't want to stretch his luck. He wanted to
think things over, sleep in the woods for the night, and then in the
morning go to a city or town.

He pushed his way past dense underbrush into the forest proper. Here he
walked through shaded groves of giant oaks. All around him was the chirp
and bustle of unseen bird and animal life. Far in front of him was a
large white sign nailed to a tree. Barrent reached it, and read:
FORESTDALE NATIONAL PARK. PICNICKERS AND CAMPERS WELCOME.

Barrent was a little disappointed, even though he realized that there
would be no virgin wilderness so near a starport. In fact, on a planet
as old and as highly developed as Earth, there was probably no virgin
land at all, except what had been preserved in national forests.

The sun was low on the horizon, and there was a chill in the long
shadows thrown across the forest floor. Barrent found a comfortable spot
under a gigantic oak, arranged leaves for a bed, and lay down. He had a
great deal to think about. Why, for example, hadn't guards been posted
at Earth's most important contact point, an interstellar terminus? Did
security measures start later at the towns and cities? Or was he already
under some sort of surveillance, some infinitely subtle spy system that
followed his every movement and apprehended him only when ready? Or was
that too fanciful? Could it be that--?

"Good evening," a voice said, close to his right ear.

Barrent flung himself away from the voice in a spasm of nervous
reaction, his hand diving for his needlebeam.

"And a very pleasant evening it is," the voice continued, "here in
Forestdale National Park. The temperature is seventy-eight point two
degrees Fahrenheit, humidity 23 per cent, barometer steady at
twenty-nine point nine. Old campers, I'm sure, already recognize my
voice. For the new nature-lovers among you, let me introduce myself. I
am Oaky, your friendly oak tree. I'd like to welcome all of you, old
and new, to your friendly national forest."

Sitting upright in the gathering darkness, Barrent peered around,
wondering what kind of a trick this was. The voice really did seem to
come from the giant oak tree.

"The enjoyment of nature," said Oaky, "is now easy and convenient for
everyone. You can enjoy complete seclusion and still be no more than a
ten-minute walk from public transportation. For those who do not desire
seclusion, we have guided tours at nominal cost through these ancient
glades. Remember to tell your friends about your friendly national park.
The full facilities of this park are waiting for all lovers of the great
outdoors."

A panel in the tree opened. Out slid a bedroll, a Thermos bottle, and a
box supper.

"I wish you a pleasant evening," said Oaky, "amid the wild splendor of
nature's wonderland. And now the National Symphony Orchestra under the
direction of Otter Krug brings you 'The Upland Glades,' by Ernesto
Nestrichala, recorded by the National North American Broadcasting
Company. This is your friendly oak tree signing off."

Music emanated from several hidden speakers. Barrent scratched his head;
then, deciding to take matters as they came, he ate the food, drank
coffee from the Thermos, unrolled the bedroll, and lay down.

Sleepily he contemplated the notion of a forest wired for sound,
equipped with food and drink, and none of it more than ten minutes from
public transportation. Earth certainly did a lot for her citizens.
Presumably they liked this sort of thing. Or did they? Could this be
some huge and subtle trap which the authorities had set for him?

He tossed and turned for a while, trying to get used to the music. After
a while it blended into the background of windblown leaves and creaking
branches. Barrent went to sleep.




Chapter Twenty-Five


In the morning, the friendly oak tree dispensed breakfast and shaving
equipment. Barrent ate, washed and shaved, and set out for the nearest
town. He had his objectives firmly in mind. He had to establish some
sort of foolproof disguise, and he had to make contact with Earth's
underground. When this was accomplished, he had to find out as much as
he could about Earth's secret police, military dispositions, and the
like.

Group Two had worked out a procedure for accomplishing these objectives.
As Barrent came to the outskirts of a town, he hoped that the Group's
methods would work. So far, the Earth he was on had very little
resemblance to the Earth which the Group had reconstructed.

He walked down interminable streets lined with small white cottages. At
first, he thought every house looked the same. Then he realized that
each had one or two small architectural differences. But instead of
distinguishing the houses, these niggling differences simply served to
point up the monotonous similarities. There were hundreds of these
cottages, stretching as far as he could see, each of them set upon a
little plot of carefully tended grass. Their genteel sameness depressed
him. Unexpectedly he missed the ridiculous, clumsy, make-shift
individuality of Omegan buildings.

He reached a shopping center. The stores repeated the pattern set by the
houses. They were low, discreet, and very similar. Only a close
inspection of window displays revealed differences between a food store
and a sports shop. He passed a small building with a sign that read,
ROBOT CONFESSIONAL--_Open 24 hours a day._ It seemed to be some sort of
church.

The procedure set by Group Two for locating the underground on Earth was
simple and straightforward. Revolutionaries, he had been told, are found
in greatest quantity among a civilization's most depressed elements.
Poverty breeds dissatisfaction; the have-nots want to take from those
who have. Therefore, the logical place to look for subversion is in the
slums.

It was a good theory. The trouble was, Barrent couldn't find any slums.
He walked for hours, past neat stores and pleasant little homes,
playgrounds and parks, scrupulously tended farms, and then past more
houses and stores. Nothing looked much better or worse than anything
else.

By evening, he was tired and footsore. As far as he could tell, he had
discovered nothing of significance. Before he could penetrate any deeper
into the complexities of Earth, he would have to question the local
citizens. It was a dangerous step, but one which he could not avoid.

He stood near a clothing store in the gathering dusk and decided upon a
course of action. He would pose as a foreigner, a man newly arrived in
North America from Asia or Europe. In that way, he should be able to ask
questions with a measure of safety.

A man was walking toward him, a plump, ordinary-looking fellow in a
brown business tunic. Barrent stopped him. "I beg your pardon," he said.
"I'm a stranger here, just arrived from Rome."

"Really?" the man said.

"Yes. I'm afraid I don't understand things over here very well," Barrent
said, with an apologetic little laugh. "I can't seem to find any cheap
hotels. If you could direct me--"

"Citizen, do you feel all right?" the man asked, his face hardening.

"As I said, I'm a foreigner, and I'm looking--"

"Now look," the man said, "you know as well as I do that there aren't
any outlanders any more."

"There aren't?"

"Of course not. I've _been_ in Rome. It's just like here in Wilmington.
Same sort of houses and stores. No one's an outlander any more."

Barrent couldn't think of anything to say. He smiled nervously.

"Furthermore," the man said, "there are no cheap lodgings anywhere on
Earth. Why should there be? Who would stay in them?"

"Who indeed?" Barrent said. "I guess I've had a little too much to
drink."

"No one drinks any more," the man said. "I don't understand. What sort
of a game is this?"

"What sort of a game do you _think_ it is?" Barrent asked, falling back
on a technique which the Group had recommended.

The man stared at him, frowning. "I think I get it," he said. "You must
be an Opinioner."

"Mmm," Barrent said, noncommittally.

"Sure, that's it," the man said. "You're one of those citizens goes
around asking people's opinions. For surveys and that sort of thing.
Right?"

"You've made a very intelligent guess," Barrent said.

"Well, I don't suppose it was too hard. Opinioners are always walking
around trying to get people's attitudes on things. I would have spotted
you right away if you'd been wearing Opinioners' clothing." The man
started to frown again. "How come you aren't dressed like an Opinioner?"

"I just graduated," Barrent said. "Haven't had a chance to get the
clothes."

"Oh. Well, you should get the proper wear," the man said sententiously.
"How can a citizen tell your status?"

"Just a test sampling," Barrent said. "Thank you for your cooperation,
sir. Perhaps I'll have a chance to interview you again in the near
future."

"Any time," the man said. He nodded politely and walked off.

Barrent thought about it, and decided that the occupation of Opinioner
was perfect for him. It would give him the all-important right to ask
questions, to meet people, to find out how Earth lived. He would have to
be careful, of course, not to reveal his ignorance. But working with
circumspection, he should have a general knowledge of this civilization
in a few days.

First, he would have to buy Opinioners' clothing. That seemed to be
important. The trouble was, he had no money with which to pay for it.
The Group had been unable to duplicate Earth money; they couldn't even
remember what it looked like.

But they had provided him with a means of overcoming even that obstacle.
Barrent turned and went into the nearest costumer's.

The proprietor was a short man with china-blue eyes and a salesman's
ready smile. He welcomed Barrent and asked how he could be of service.

"I need Opinioners' clothing," Barrent told him. "I've just graduated."

"Of course, sir," the owner said. "And you've come to the right place
for it. Most of the smaller stores don't carry the clothing for anything
but the more ... ah ... common professions. But here at Jules
Wonderson's, we have ready-wears for all of the five hundred and twenty
major professions listed in the Civil Status Almanac. I am Jules
Wonderson."

"A pleasure," Barrent said. "Have you a ready-wear in my size?"

"I'm sure I have," Wonderson said. "Would you care for a Regular or a
Special?"

"A Regular will do nicely."

"Most new Opinioners prefer the Special," Wonderson said. "The little
extra simulated handmade touches increase the public's respect."

"In that case I'll take the Special."

"Yes, sir. Though if you could wait a day or two, we will be having in a
new fabric--a simulated Home Loom, complete with natural weaving
mistakes. For the man of status discrimination. A real prestige item."

"Perhaps I'll come back for that," Barrent said. "Right now, I need a
ready-wear."

"Of course, sir," Wonderson said, disappointed but hiding it bravely.
"If you'll wait just one little minute...."

After several fittings, Barrent found himself wearing a black business
suit with a thin edge of white piping around the lapels. To his
inexperienced eye it looked almost exactly like the other suits
Wonderson had on display for bankers, stock brokers, grocers,
accountants, and the like. But for Wonderson, who talked about the
banker's lapel and the insurance agent's drape, the differences were as
clear as the gross status-symbols of Omega. Barrent decided it was just
a question of training.

"There, sir!" Wonderson said. "A perfect fit, and a fabric guaranteed
for a lifetime. All for thirty-nine ninety-five."

"Excellent," Barrent said. "Now, about the money--"

"Yes, sir?"

Barrent took the plunge. "I haven't any."

"You haven't, sir? That's quite unusual."

"Yes, it is," Barrent said. "However, I _do_ have certain articles of
value." From his pocket he took three diamond rings with which the Group
on Omega had supplied him. "These stones are genuine diamonds, as any
jeweler will be glad to attest. If you would take one of them until I
have the money for payment--"

"But, sir," Wonderson said, "diamonds and such have no intrinsic value.
They haven't since '23, when Von Blon wrote the definitive work
destroying the concept of scarcity value."

"Of course," Barrent said, at a loss for words.

Wonderson looked at the rings. "I suppose these have a sentimental
value, though."

"Certainly. We've had them in the family for generations."

"In that case," Wonderson said, "I wouldn't want to deprive you of them.
Please, no arguments, sir! Sentiment is the most priceless of emotions.
I couldn't sleep nights if I took even one of these family heirlooms
from you."

"But there's the matter of payment."

"Pay me at your leisure."

"You mean you'll trust me, even though you don't know me?"

"Most certainly," Wonderson said. He smiled archly. "Trying out your
Opinioner's methods, aren't you? Well, even a child knows that our
civilization is based upon trust, not collateral. It is axiomatic that
even a stranger is to be trusted until he has conclusively and
unmistakably proven otherwise."

"Haven't you ever been cheated?"

"Of course not. Crime is nonexistent these days."

"In that case," Barrent asked, "what about Omega?"

"I beg your pardon?"

"Omega, the prison planet. You must have heard of it."

"I think I have," Wonderson said cautiously. "Well, I should have said
that crime is _almost_ nonexistent. I suppose there will always be a
few congenital criminal types, easily recognizable as such. But I'm
told they don't amount to more than ten or twelve individuals a year out
of a population of nearly two billion." He smiled broadly. "My chances
of meeting one are exceedingly rare."

Barrent thought about the prison ships constantly shuttling back and
forth between Earth and Omega, dumping their human cargo and returning
for more. He wondered where Wonderson got his statistics. For that
matter, he wondered where the police were. He had seen no military
uniform since leaving the starship. He would have liked to ask about it,
but it seemed wiser to discontinue that line of questioning.

"Thank you very much for the credit," Barrent said. "I'll be back with
the payment as soon as possible."

"Of course you will," Wonderson said, warmly shaking Barrent's hand.
"Take your time, sir. No rush at all."

Barrent thanked him again and left the store.

He had a profession now. And if other people believed as Wonderson did,
he had unlimited credit. He was on a planet that seemed, at first
glance, to be a utopia. The utopia presented certain contradictions, of
course. He hoped to find out more about them over the next few days.

Down the block, Barrent found a hotel called The Bide-A-Bit. He engaged
a room for the week, on credit.




Chapter Twenty-Six


In the morning, Barrent asked directions to the nearest branch of the
public library. He decided that he needed as much background out of
books as he could get. With a knowledge of the history and development
of Earth's civilization, he would have a better idea of what to expect
and what to watch out for.

His Opinioner's clothing allowed him access to the closed shelves where
the history books were kept. But the books themselves were
disappointing. Most of them were Earth's ancient history, from earliest
beginnings to the dawn of atomic power. Barrent skimmed through them. As
he read, some memories of prior reading returned to him. He was able to
jump quickly from Periclean Greece to Imperial Rome, to Charlemagne and
the Dark Ages, from the Norman Conquest to the Thirty Years' War, and
then to a rapid survey of the Napoleonic Era. He read with more care
about the World Wars. The book ended with the explosion of the first
atom bombs. The other books on the shelf were simply amplifications of
various stages of history he had found in the first book.

After a great deal of searching, Barrent found a small work entitled,
"The Postwar Dilemma, Volume 1," by Arthur Whittler. It began where the
other histories had left off; with the atomic bombs exploding over
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Barrent sat down and began to read carefully.

He learned about the Cold War of the 1950's, when several nations were
in possession of atomic and hydrogen weapons. Already, the author
stated, the seeds of a massive and stultifying conformity were present
in the nations of the world. In America, there was the frenzied
resistance to communism. In Russia and China, there was the frenzied
resistance to capitalism. One by one, all the nations of the world were
drawn into one camp or the other. For purposes of internal security, all
countries relied upon the newest propaganda and indoctrination
techniques. All countries felt they needed, for survival's sake, a rigid
adherence to state-approved doctrines.

The pressure upon the individual to conform became both stronger and
subtler.

The dangers of war passed. The many societies of Earth began to merge
into a single superstate. But the pressure to conform, instead of
lessening, grew more intense. The need was dictated by the continued
explosive increase in population, and the many problems of unification
across national and ethnic lines. Differences in opinion could be
deadly; too many groups now had access to the supremely deadly hydrogen
bombs.

Under the circumstances, deviant behavior could not be tolerated.

Unification was finally completed. The conquest of space went on, from
moon ship to planet ship to star ship. But Earth became increasingly
rigid in its institutions. A civilization more inflexible than anything
produced by medieval Europe punished any opposition to existing customs,
habits, beliefs. These breaches of the social contract were considered
major crimes as serious as murder or arson. They were punished
similarly. The antique institutions of secret police, political police,
informers, all were used. Every possible device was brought to bear
toward the all-important goal of conformity.

For the nonconformists, there was Omega.

Capital punishment had been banished long before, but there was neither
room nor resources to take the growing number of criminals who crammed
prisons everywhere. The world leaders finally decided to transport these
criminals to a separate prison world, copying a system which the French
had used in Guiana and New Caledonia, and the British had used in
Australia and early North America. Since it was impossible to rule Omega
from Earth, the authorities didn't try. They simply made sure that none
of the prisoners escaped.

That was the end of volume one. A note at the end said that volume two
was to be a study of contemporary Earth. It was entitled _The Status
Civilization_.

The second volume was not on the shelves. Barrent asked the librarian,
and was told that it had been destroyed in the interests of public
safety.

Barrent left the library and went to a little park. He sat and stared at
the ground and tried to think.

He had expected to find an Earth similar to the one described in
Whittler's book. He had been prepared for a police state, tight security
controls, a repressed populace, and a growing air of unrest. But that,
apparently, was the past. So far, he hadn't even seen a policeman. He
had observed no security controls, and the people he had met did not
seem harshly repressed. Quite the contrary. This seemed like a
completely different world....

Except that year after year, the ships came to Omega with their cargoes
of brainwashed prisoners. Who arrested them? Who judged them? What sort
of a society produced them?

He would have to find out the answers himself.




Chapter Twenty-Seven


Early the next morning, Barrent began his exploration. His technique was
simple. He rang doorbells and asked questions. He warned all his
subjects that his real questions might be interspersed with tricks or
nonsense questions, whose purpose was to test the general awareness
level. In that way, Barrent found he could ask anything at all about
Earth, could explore controversial or even nonexistent areas, and do so
without revealing his own ignorance.

There was still the danger that some official would ask for his
credentials, or that the police would mysteriously spring up when least
expected. But he had to take those risks. Starting at the beginning of
Orange Esplanade, Barrent worked his way northward, calling at each
house as he went. His results were uneven, as a selective sampling of
his work shows:

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen A. L. Gotthreid, age 55, occupation home-tender. A strong,
erect woman, imperious but polite, with a no-nonsense air about her._)

"You want to ask me about class and status? Is that it?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"You Opinioners are _always_ asking about class and status. One would
think you'd know all about it by now. But very well. Today, since
everyone is equal, there is only one class. The _middle_ class. The only
question then is--to what portion of the middle class does one belong?
High, low, or middle?"

"And how is that determined?"

"Why, by all sorts of things. The way a person speaks, eats, dresses,
the way he acts in public. His manners. His clothing. You can always
tell your upper middle class man by his clothes. It's quite
unmistakable."

"I see. And the lower middle classes?"

"Well, for one thing they lack creative energy. They wear ready-made
clothing, for example, without taking the trouble to improve upon it.
The same goes for their homes. Mere uninspired adornment won't do, let
me add. That's simply the mark of the _nouveau_ upper middle class. One
doesn't receive such persons in the home."

"Thank you, Citizen Gotthreid. And where would you classify yourself
statuswise?"

(With the very faintest hesitation). "Oh, I've never thought much about
it--upper middle, I suppose."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Dreister, age 43, occupation shoe vendor. A slender, mild man,
young-looking for his years._)

"Yes, sir. Myra and I have three children of school age. All boys."

"Could you give me some idea what their education consists of?"

"They learn how to read and write, and how to become good citizens.
They're already starting to learn their trades. The oldest is going into
the family business--shoes. The other two are taking apprenticeship
courses in groceries and retail marketing. That's my wife's family's
business. They also learn how to retain status, and how to utilize
standard techniques for moving upward. That's about what goes on in the
open classes."

"Are there other school classes which are not open?"

"Well, naturally there are the closed classes. Every child attends
them."

"And what do they learn in the closed classes?"

"I don't know. They're closed, as I said."

"Don't the children ever speak about those classes?"

"No. They talk about everything under the sun, but not about that."

"Haven't you any idea what goes on in the closed classes?"

"Sorry, I don't. At a guess--and it's only a guess, mind you--I'd say
it's probably something religious. But you'd have to ask a teacher for
that."

"Thank you, sir. And how do you classify yourself statuswise?"

"Middle middle class. Not much doubt about that."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Maryjane Morgan, age 51, occupation school-teacher. A tall,
bony woman._)

"Yes, sir, I think that just about sums up our curriculum at the Little
Beige Schoolhouse."

"Except for the closed classes."

"I beg your pardon, sir?"

"The closed classes. You haven't discussed those."

"I'm afraid I can't."

"Why not, Citizen Morgan?"

"Is this a trick question? Everyone knows that teachers aren't allowed
in the closed classes."

"Who _is_ allowed in?"

"The children, of course."

"But who teaches them?"

"The government is in charge of that."

"Of course. But who, specifically, does the teaching in the closed
classes?"

"I have no idea, sir. It's none of my business. The closed classes are
an ancient and respected institution. What goes on in them is quite
possibly of a religious nature. But that's only a guess. Whatever it is,
it's none of my business. Nor is it yours, young man, Opinioner or not."

"Thank you, Citizen Morgan."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Edgar Nief, age 107, occupation retired officer. A tall,
stooped man with cane, icy blue eyes undimmed by age._)

"A little louder, please. What was that question again?"

"About the armed forces. Specifically I asked--"

"I remember now. Yes, young man, I was a colonel in the Twenty-first
North American Spaceborne Commando, which was a regular unit of the
Earth Defense Corps."

"And did you retire from the service?"

"No, the service retired from me."

"I beg pardon, sir?"

"You heard me correctly, young man. It happened just sixty-three years
ago. The Earth Armed Forces were demobilized, except for the police
whom I cannot count. But all regular units were demobilized."

"Why was that done, sir?"

"There wasn't anyone to fight. Wasn't even anyone to guard against, or
so I was told. Damned foolish business, I say."

"Why, sir?"

"Because an old soldier knows that you can never tell when an enemy
might spring up. It could happen now. And then where would we be?"

"Couldn't the armies be formed again?"

"Certainly. But the present generation has no concept of serving under
arms. There are no leaders left, outside of a few useless old fools like
me. It would take years for an effective force, effectively led, to be
formed."

"And in the meantime, Earth is completely open to invasion from the
outside?"

"Yes, except for the police units. And I seriously doubt their
reliability under fire."

"Could you tell me about the police?"

"There is nothing I know about them. I have never bothered my head about
non-military matters."

"But it is conceivable that the police have now taken over the functions
of the army, isn't it? That the police constitute a sizable and
disciplined paramilitary force?"

"It is possible, sir. Anything is possible."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Moertin Honners, age 31, occupation verbalizer. A slim,
languid man with an earnest, boyish face and smooth, corn-blond hair._)

"You are a verbalizer, Citizen Honners?"

"I am, sir. Though perhaps 'author' would be a better word, if you don't
mind."

"Of course. Citizen Honners, are you presently engaged in writing for
any of the periodicals I see on the dissemination stands?"

"Certainly not! These are written by incompetent hacks for the dubious
delectation of the lower middle class. The stories, in case you didn't
know, are taken line by line from the works of various popular writers
of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. The people who do the work
merely substitute adjectives and adverbs. Occasionally, I'm told, a more
daring hack will substitute a verb, or even a noun. But that is rare.
The editors of such periodicals frown upon sweeping innovations."

"And you are not engaged in such work?"

"Absolutely not! My work is noncommercial. I am a Creative Conrad
Specialist."

"Would you mind telling me what that means, Citizen Honners?"

"I'd be happy to. My own particular field of endeavor lies in
re-creating the works of Joseph Conrad, an author who lived in the
pre-atomic era."

"How do you go about re-creating those works, sir?"

"Well, at present I am engaged in my fifth re-creation of _Lord Jim_. To
do it, I steep myself as thoroughly as possible in the original work.
Then I set about rewriting it as Conrad would have written it if he had
lived today. It is a labor which calls for extreme diligence, and for
the utmost in artistic integrity. A single slip could mar the
re-creation. As you can see, it calls for a preliminary mastery of
Conrad's vocabulary, themes, plots, characters, mood, approach, and so
on. All this goes in, and yet the book cannot be a slavish _repeat_. It
must have something new to say, just as Conrad would have said it."

"And have you succeeded?"

"The critics have been generous, and my publisher gives me every
encouragement."

"When you have finished your fifth re-creation of _Lord Jim_, what do
you plan to do?"

"First I shall take a long rest. Then I shall re-create one of Conrad's
minor works. _The Planter of Malata_, perhaps."

"I see. Is re-creation the rule in all the arts?"

"It is the goal of the true aspiring artist, no matter what medium he
has chosen to work in. Art is a cruel mistress, I fear."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Willis Ouerka, age 8, occupation student. A cheerful,
black-haired, sun-tanned boy._)

"I'm sorry, Mr. Opinioner, my parents aren't home right now."

"That's perfectly all right, Willis. Do you mind if I ask you a question
or two?"

"I don't mind. What's that you got under your jacket, Mister? It
bulges."

"I'll ask the questions, Willis, if you don't mind.... Now, do you like
school?"

"It's all right."

"What courses do you take?"

"Well, there's reading and writing and status appreciation, and courses
in art, music, architecture, literature, ballet, and theater. The usual
stuff."

"I see. That's in the open classes?"

"Sure."

"Do you also attend a closed class?"

"Sure I do. Every day."

"Do you mind talking about it?"

"I don't mind. Is that bulge a gun? I know what guns are. Some of the
big boys were passing around pictures at lunchtime a couple days ago and
I peeked. Is it a gun?"

"No. My suit doesn't fit very well, that's all. Now then. Would you mind
telling me what you do in the closed class?"

"I don't mind."

"What happens, then?"

"I don't remember."

"Come now, Willis."

"Really, Mr. Opinioner. We all go into this classroom, and we come out
two hours later for recess. But that's all. I can't remember anything
else. I've talked with the other kids. They can't remember either."

"Strange...."

"No, sir. If we were supposed to remember, it wouldn't be _closed_."

"Perhaps so. Do you remember what the room looks like, or who your
teacher is for the closed class?"

"No, sir. I really don't remember anything at all about it."

"Thank you. Willis."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Cuchulain Dent, age 37, occupation inventor. A prematurely
bald man with ironic, heavy-lidded eyes._)

"Yep, that's right. I'm an inventor specializing in games. I brought
out _Triangulate--Or Else!_ last year. It's been pretty popular. Have
you seen it?"

"I'm afraid not."

"Sort of a cute game. It's a simulated lost-in-space thing. The players
are given incomplete data for their miniature computers, additional
information as they win it. Space hazards for penalties. Lots of
flashing lights and stuff like that. Very big seller."

"Do you invent anything else, Citizen Dent?"

"When I was a kid, I worked up an improved seeder harvester. Designed to
be approximately three times as efficient as the present models. And
would you believe it, I really thought I had a chance of selling it."

"Did you sell it?"

"Of course not. At that time I didn't realize that the patent office was
closed permanently except for the games section."

"Were you angry about that?"

"A little angry at the time. But I soon realized that the models we have
are plenty good enough. There's no need for more efficient or more
ingenious inventions. Folks today are satisfied with what they've got.
Besides, new inventions would be of no service to mankind. Earth's birth
and death rate are stable, and there's enough for everyone. To produce a
new invention, you'd have to retool an entire factory. That would be
almost impossible, since all the factories today are automatic and
self-repairing. That's why there's a moratorium on invention, except in
the novelty game field."

"How do you feel about it?"

"What's there to feel? That's how things are."

"Would you like to have things different?"

"Maybe. But being an inventor, I'm classified as a potentially unstable
character anyhow."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Barn Threnten, age 41, occupation atomics engineer
specializing in spacecraft design. A nervous, intelligent-looking man
with sad brown eyes._)

"You want to know what I do in my job? I'm sorry you asked that,
Citizen, because I don't do a thing except walk around the factory.
Union rules require one stand-by human for every robot or robotized
operation. That's what I do. I just stand by."

"You sound dissatisfied, Citizen Threnten."

"I am. I wanted to be an atomics engineer. I trained for it. Then when I
graduated, I found out my knowledge was fifty years out of date. Even if
I learned what was going on now, I'd have no place to use it."

"Why not?"

"Because everything in atomics is automatized. I don't know if the
majority of the population knows that, but it's true. From raw material
to finished product, it's all completely automatic. The only human
participation in the program is quantity-control in terms of population
indexes. And even that is minimal."

"What happens if a part of an automatic factory breaks down?"

"It gets fixed by robot repair units."

"And if they break down?"

"The damned things are self-repairing. All I can do is stand by and
watch, and fill out a report. Which is a ridiculous position for a man
who considers himself an engineer."

"Why don't you turn to some other field?"

"No use. I've checked, and the rest of the engineers are in the same
position I'm in, watching automatic processes which they don't
understand. Name your field: food processing, automobile manufacture,
construction, biochem., it's all the same. Either stand-by engineers or
no engineers at all."

"This is true for spaceflight also?"

"Sure. No member of the spacepilot's union has been off Earth for close
to fifty years. They wouldn't know how to operate a ship."

"I see. All the ships are set for automatic."

"Exactly. Permanently and irrevocably automatic."

"What would happen if these ships ran into an unprecedented situation?"

"That's hard to say. The ships can't think, you know; they simply follow
pre-set programs. If the ships ran into a situation for which they were
not programmed, they'd be paralyzed, at least temporarily. I think they
have an optimum-choice selector which is supposed to take over
unstructured situations; but it's never been tried out. At best, it
would react sluggishly. At worst, it wouldn't work at all. And that
would be fine by me."

"Do you really mean that?"

"I certainly do. I'm sick of standing around watching a machine do the
same thing day after day. Most of the professional men I know feel the
same way. We want to do something. Anything. Did you know that a hundred
years ago human-piloted starships were exploring the planets of other
solar systems?"

"Yes."

"Well, that's what we should be doing now. Moving outward, exploring,
advancing. That's what we need."

"I agree. But don't you think you're saying rather dangerous things?"

"I know I am. But frankly, I just don't care any longer. Let them ship
me to Omega if they want to. I'm doing no good here."

"Then you've heard about Omega?"

"Anyone connected with starships knows about Omega. Round trips between
Omega and Earth, that's all our ships do. It's a terrible world.
Personally, I put the blame on the clergy."

"The clergy?"

"Absolutely. Those sanctimonious fools with their endless drivel about
the Church of the Spirit of Mankind Incarnate. It's enough to make a man
wish for a little evil...."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Father Boeren, age 51, occupation clergyman. A stately,
plum-shaped man wearing a saffron robe and white sandals._)

"That's right, my son, I am the abbot of the local branch of the Church
of the Spirit of Mankind Incarnate. Our church is the official and
exclusive religious expression of the government of Earth. Our religion
speaks for all the peoples of Earth. It is a composite of the best
elements of all the former religions, both major and minor, skillfully
blended into a single all-embracing faith."

"Citizen Abbot, aren't there bound to be contradictions in doctrine
among the various religions which make up your faith?"

"There _were_. But the forgers of our present Church threw out all
controversial matter. We wanted agreement, not dissension. We preserve
only certain colorful facets of those early great religions; facets with
which people can identify. There have never been any schisms in our
religion, because we are all-acceptant. One may believe anything one
wishes, as long as it preserves the holy spirit of Mankind Incarnate.
For our worship, you see, is the true worship of Man. And the spirit we
recognize is the spirit of the divine and holy Good."

"Would you define Good for me, Citizen Abbot?"

"Certainly. Good is that force within us which inspires men to acts of
conformity and subservience. The worship of Good is essentially the
worship of oneself, and therefore the only true worship. The self which
one worships is the ideal social being: the man content in his niche in
society, yet ready to creatively advance his status. Good is gentle,
since it is a true reflection of the loving and pitying universe. Good
is continually changing in its aspects, although it comes to us in the ...
You have a strange look on your face, young man."

"I'm sorry, Citizen Abbot. I believe I heard that sermon, or one very
much like it."

"It is true wherever one hears it."

"Of course. One more question, sir. Could you tell me about the
religious instruction of children?"

"That duty is performed for us by the robot-confessors."

"Yes?"

"The notion came to us from the ancient root-faith of Transcendental
Freudianism. The robot-confessor instructs children and adults alike. It
hears their problems within the social matrix. It is their constant
friend, their social mentor, their religious instructor. Being robotic,
the confessors are able to give exact and unvarying answers to any
question. This aids the great work of Conformity."

"I can see that it does. What do the human priests do?"

"They watch over the robot-confessors."

"Are these robot-confessors present in the closed classrooms?"

"I am not competent to answer that."

"They are, aren't they?"

"I truly do not know. The closed classrooms are closed to abbots as well
as other adults."

"By whose order?"

"By order of the Chief of the Secret Police."

"I see.... Thank you, Citizen Abbot Boeren."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Citizen Enyen Dravivian, age 43, occupation government employee. A
narrow-faced, slit-eyed man, old and tired beyond his years._)

"Good afternoon, sir. You say that you are employed by the government?"

"Correct."

"Is that the state or the federal government?"

"Both."

"I see. And have you been in this employ for very long?"

"Approximately eighteen years."

"Yes, sir. Would you mind telling me what, specifically, your job is?"

"Not at all. I am the Chief of the Secret Police."

"You are--I see, sir. That's very interesting. I--"

"Don't reach for your needlebeam, ex-Citizen Barrent. I can assure you,
it won't operate in the blanketed area around this house. And if you
draw it, you'll be hurt."

"How?"

"I have my own means of protection."

"How did you know my name?"

"I've known about you almost since you set foot upon Earth. We are not
entirely without resources you know. But we can discuss all that inside.
Won't you come in?"

"I think I'd rather not."

"I'm afraid you have to. Come, Barrent, I won't bite you."

"Am I under arrest?"

"Of course not. We're simply going to have a little talk. That's right,
sir, right through there. Just make yourself comfortable."




Chapter Twenty-Eight


Dravivian led him into a large room paneled in walnut. The furniture was
of a heavy, black wood, intricately carved and varnished. The desk, high
and straight, seemed to be an antique. A heavy tapestry covered one
entire wall. It depicted, in fading colors, a medieval hunting scene.

"Do you like it?" Dravivian asked. "My family did the furnishing. My
wife copied the tapestry from an original in the Metropolitan Museum. My
two sons collaborated on the furniture. They wanted something ancient
and Spanish in feeling, but with more comfort than antiques usually
give. A slight modification of the lines accomplished that. My own
contributions are not visible. Music of the baroque period is my
specialty."

"Aside from policework," Barrent said.

"Yes, aside from that." Dravivian turned away from Barrent and looked
thoughtfully at the tapestry. "We will come to the matter of the police
in due course. Tell me first, what do you think of this room?"

"It's very beautiful," Barrent said.

"Yes. And?"

"Well--I'm no judge."

"You _must_ judge," Dravivian said. "In this room you can see Earth's
civilization in miniature. Tell me what you think of it."

"It feels lifeless," Barrent said.

Dravivian turned to Barrent and smiled. "Yes, that's a good word for it.
Self-involved might perhaps be better. This is a high-status room,
Barrent. A great deal of creativity has gone into the artistic
improvement of ancient archetypes. My family has re-created a bit of the
Spanish past, as others have re-created bits of the Mayan, Early
American, or Oceanic past. And yet, the essential hollowness is obvious.
Our automatized factories produce the same goods for us year in and year
out. Since everyone has these same goods, it is necessary for us to
change the factory product, to improve and embroider it, to express
ourselves through it, to rank ourselves by it. That's how Earth is,
Barrent. Our energy and skills are channeled into essentially decadent
pursuits. We re-carve old furniture, worry about rank and status, and in
the meantime the frontier of the distant planets remains unexplored and
unconquered. We ceased long ago to expand. Stability brought the danger
of stagnation, to which we succumbed. We became so highly socialized
that individuality had to be diverted to the most harmless of pursuits,
turned inward, kept from any meaningful expression. I think you have
seen a fair amount of that in your time on Earth?"

"I have. But I never expected to hear the Chief of the Secret Police say
it."

"I'm an unusual man," Dravivian said, with a mocking smile. "And the
Secret Police is an unusual institution."

"It must be very efficient. How did you find out about me?"

"That was really quite simple. Most of the people of Earth are
security-conditioned from childhood. It's part of our heritage, you
know. Nearly all the people you met were able to tell that there was
something very wrong about you. You were as obviously out of place as a
wolf among sheep. People noticed, and reported directly to me."

"All right," Barrent said. "Now what?"

"First I would like you to tell me about Omega."

Barrent told the Police Chief about his life on the prison planet.
Dravivian nodded, a faint smile on his lips.

"Yes, it's very much as I expected," he said. "The same sort of thing
has happened on Omega as happened in early America and Australia. There
are differences, of course; you have been shut off more completely from
the mother country. But the same fierce energy and drive is there, and
the same ruthlessness."

"What are you going to do?" Barrent asked.

Dravivian shrugged his shoulders. "It really doesn't matter. I suppose I
could kill you. But that wouldn't stop your group on Omega from sending
out other spies, or from seizing one of the prison ships. As soon as the
Omegans begin to move in force, they'll discover the truth anyhow."

"What truth?"

"By now it must be obvious to you," Dravivian said. "Earth hasn't fought
a war for nearly eight hundred years. We wouldn't know how. The
organization of guardships around Omega is pure facade. The ships are
completely automatized, built to meet conditions of several hundreds
years ago. A determined attack will capture a ship; and when you have
one, the rest will fall. After that, there's nothing to stop the Omegans
from coming back to Earth; and there's nothing on Earth to fight them
with. This, you must realize, is the reason why all prisoners leaving
Earth are divorced from their memories. If they _remembered_, Earth's
vulnerability would be painfully apparent."

"If you knew all this," Barrent asked, "why didn't your leaders do
something about it?"

"That was our original intention. But there was no real drive behind the
intention. We preferred not to think about it. We assumed the status quo
would remain indefinitely. We didn't want to think about the day when
the Omegans returned to Earth."

"What are you and your police going to do about it?" Barrent asked.

"I am facade, too," Dravivian told him. "I have no police. The position
of Chief is entirely honorary. There has been no need of a police force
on Earth for close to a century."

"You're going to need one when the Omegans come home," Barrent said.

"Yes. There's going to be crime again, and serious trouble. But I think
the final amalgamation will be successful. You on Omega have the drive,
the ambition to reach the stars. I believe you need a certain stability
and creativeness which Earth can provide. Whatever the results, the
union is inevitable. We've lived in a dream here for too long. It's
going to take violent measures to awaken us."

Dravivian rose to his feet. "And now," he said, "since the fate of Earth
and Omega seem to be decided, could I offer you some refreshment?"




Chapter Twenty-Nine


With the help of the Chief of Police, Barrent put a message aboard the
next ship to leave for Omega. The message told about conditions on Earth
and urged immediate action. When that was finished, Barrent was ready
for his final job--to find the judge who had sentenced him for a crime
he hadn't committed, and the lying informer who had turned him in to the
judge. When he found those two, Barrent knew he would regain the missing
portions of his memory.

He took the night expressway to Youngerstun. His suspicions, sharply
keyed from life on Omega, would not let him rest. There had to be a
catch to all this splendid simplicity. Perhaps he would find it in
Youngerstun.

By early morning he was there. Superficially, the neat rows of houses
looked the same as in any other town. But for Barrent they were
different, and achingly familiar. He _remembered_ this town, and the
monotonous houses had individuality and meaning for him. He had been
born and raised in this town.

There was Grothmeir's store, and across the street was the home of
Havening, the local interior decorating champion. Here was Billy
Havelock's house. Billy had been his best friend. They had planned on
being starmen together, and had remained good friends after
school--until Barrent had been sentenced to Omega.

Here was Andrew Therkaler's house. And down the block was the school he
had attended. He could remember the classes. He could remember how,
every day, they had gone through the door that led to the closed class.
But he still could not remember what he had learned there.

Right here, near two huge elms, the murder had taken place. Barrent
walked to the spot and remembered how it had happened. He had been on
his way home. From somewhere down the street he had heard a scream. He
had turned, and a man--Illiardi--had run down the street and thrown
something at him. Barrent had caught it instinctively and found himself
holding an illegal handgun. A few steps further, he had looked into the
twisted dead face of Andrew Therkaler.

And what had happened next? Confusion. Panic. A sensation of someone
watching as he stood, weapon in hand, over the corpse. There, at the end
of the street, was the refuge to which he had gone.

He walked up to it, and recognized it as a robot-confessional booth.

Barrent entered the booth. It was small, and there was a faint odor of
incense in the air. The room contained a single chair. Facing it was a
complex, brilliantly lighted panel.

"Good morning, Will," the panel said to him.

Barrent had a sudden sense of helplessness when he heard that soft
mechanical voice. He remembered it now. The passionless voice knew all,
understood all, and forgave nothing. That artfully manufactured voice
had spoken to him, had listened, and then had judged. In his dream, he
had personified the robot-confessor into the figure of a human judge.

"You remember me?" Barrent asked.

"Of course," said the robot-confessor. "You were one of my parishioners
before you went to Omega."

"You sent me there."

"For the crime of murder."

"But I didn't commit the crime!" Barrent said. "I didn't do it, and you
must have known it!"

"Of course I knew it," the robot-confessor said. "But my powers and
duties are strictly defined. I sentence according to evidence, not
intuition. By law, the robot-confessors must weigh only the concrete
evidence which is put before them. They must, when in doubt, sentence.
In fact, the mere presence of a man before me charged with murder must
be taken as a strong presumption of his guilt."

"Was there evidence against me?"

"Yes."

"Who gave it?"

"I cannot reveal his name."

"You must!" Barrent said. "Times are changing on Earth. The prisoners
are coming back. Did you know that?"

"I expected it," the robot-confessor said.

"I must have the informer's name," Barrent said. He took the needlebeam
out of his pocket and advanced toward the panel.

"A machine cannot be coerced," the robot-confessor told him.

"Give me the name!" Barrent shouted.

"I should not, for your own good. The danger would be too great. Believe
me, Will...."

"The name!"

"Very well. You will find the informer at Thirty-five Maple Street. But
I earnestly advise you not to go there. You will be killed. You simply
do not know--"

Barrent pressed the trigger, and the narrow beam scythed through the
panel. Lights flashed and faded as he cut through the intricate wiring.
At last all the lights were dead, and a faint gray smoke came from the
panel.

Barrent left the booth. He put the needlebeam back in his pocket and
walked to Maple Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had been here before. He knew this street, set upon a hill, rising
steeply between oak and maple trees. Those lampposts were old friends,
that crack in the pavement was an ancient landmark. Here were the
houses, heavy with familiarity. They seemed to lean expectantly toward
him, like spectators waiting for the final act of an almost forgotten
drama.

He stood in front of 35 Maple Street. The silence which surrounded that
plain white-shuttered house struck him as ominous. He took the
needlebeam out of his pocket, looking for a reassurance he knew he could
not find. Then he walked up the neat flagstones and tried the front
door. It opened. He stepped inside.

He made out the dim shades of lamps and furniture, the dull gleam of a
painting on the wall, a piece of statuary on an ebony pedestal.
Needlebeam in hand, he stepped into the next room.

And came face to face with the informer.

Staring at the informer's face, Barrent remembered. In an overpowering
flood of memory he saw himself, a little boy, entering the closed
classroom. He heard again the soothing hum of machinery, watched the
pretty lights blink and flash, heard the insinuating machine voice
whisper in his ear. At first, the voice filled him with horror; what it
suggested was unthinkable. Then, slowly, he became accustomed to it, and
accustomed to all the strange things that happened in the closed
classroom.

He _learned_. The machines taught on deep, unconscious levels. The
machines intertwined their lessons with the basic drives, weaving a
pattern of learned behavior with the life instinct. They taught, then
blocked off conscious knowledge of the lessons, sealed it--and fused it.

What had he been taught? _For the social good, you must be your own
policeman and witness. You must assume responsibility for any crime
which might conceivably be yours._

The face of the informer stared impassively at him. It was Barrent's own
face, reflected back from a mirror on the wall.

He had informed on himself. Standing with the gun in his hand that day,
looking down at the murdered man, learned unconscious processes had
taken over. The presumption of guilt had been too great for him to
resist, the similarity to guilt had turned into guilt itself. He had
walked to the robot-confessor's booth, and there he had given complete
and damning evidence against himself, had indicted himself on the basis
of probability.

The robot-confessor had passed the obligatory sentence and Barrent had
left the booth. Well-trained in the lessons of the classroom, he had
taken himself into custody, had gone to the nearest thought-control
center in Trenton. Already a partial amnesia had taken place, keyed to
and triggered by the lessons of the closed classroom.

The skilled android technicians in the thought-control center had
labored hard to complete this amnesia, to obliterate any remnants of
memory. As a standard safeguard against any possible recovering of his
memory, they had implanted a logical construct of his crime beneath the
conscious level. As the regulations required, this construct contained
an implication of the far-reaching power of Earth.

When the job was completed, an automatized Barrent had marched out of
the center, taken a special expressway to the prison ship depot, boarded
the prison ship, entered his cell, and closed the door and left Earth
behind him. Then he had slept until the checkpoint had been passed,
after which the newly arrived guards awakened the prisoners for
disembarkation on Omega....

Now, staring at his own face in the mirror, the last of the conscious
lessons of the classroom became conscious:

_The lessons of the closed classroom must never be consciously known by
the individual. If they become conscious the human organism must perform
an immediate act of self-destruction._

Now he saw why his conquest of Earth had been so easy; it was because he
had conquered nothing. Earth needed no security forces, for the
policeman and the executioner were implanted in every man's mind.
Beneath the surface of Earth's mild and pleasant culture was a
self-perpetuating robot civilization. An awareness of that civilization
was punishable by death.

And here, at this moment, the real struggle for Earth began.

Learned behavior patterns intertwined with basic life drives forced
Barrent to raise the needlebeam, to point it toward his head. This was
what the robot-confessor had tried to warn him about, and what the
mutant girl had skrenned. The younger Barrent, conditioned to absolute
and mindless conformity, had to kill himself.

The older Barrent who had spent time on Omega fought that blind urge. A
schizophrenic Barrent fought himself. The two parts of him battled for
possession of the weapon, for control of the body, for ownership of the
mind.

The needlebeam's movement stopped inches from his head. The muzzle
wavered. Then slowly, the new Omegan Barrent, Barrent-2, forced the
weapon away.

His victory was short-lived. For now the lessons of the closed classroom
took over, forcing Barrent-2 into a contrasurvival struggle with the
implacable and death-desiring Barrent-1.




Chapter Thirty


Conditioning took over and flung the fighting Barrents backward through
subjective time, to those stress points in the past where death had been
near, where the temporal life fabric had been weakened, where a
predisposition toward death had already been established. Conditioning
forced Barrent-2 to re-experience those moments. But this time, the
danger was augmented by the full force of the malignant half of his
personality--by the murderous informer, Barrent-1.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barrent-2 stood under glaring lights on the blood-stained sands of the
Arena, a sword in his hand. It was the time of the Omegan Games. Coming
at him was the Saunus, a heavily armored reptile with the leering face
of Barrent-1. Barrent-2 severed the creature's tail, and it changed
into three trichomotreds, rat-sized, Barrent-faced, with the
dispositions of rabid wolverines. He killed two, and the third grinned
and bit his left hand to the bone. He killed it, and watched
Barrent-1's blood leak into the soggy sand....

       *       *       *       *       *

Three ragged men sat laughing on a bench, and a girl handed him a small
gun. "Luck," she said. "I hope you know how to use this." Barrent nodded
his thanks before he noticed that the girl was not Moera; she was the
skrenning mutant who had predicted his death. Still, he moved into the
street and faced the three Hadjis.

Two of the men were mild-faced strangers. The third, Barrent-1,
stepped forward and quickly brought his gun into firing position.
Barrent-2 flung himself to the ground and pressed the trigger of his
unfamiliar weapon. He felt it vibrate in his hand and saw Hadji
Barrent's head and shoulders turn black and begin to crumble. Before he
could take aim again, his gun was wrenched violently from his hand.
Barrent-1's dying shot had creased the end of the muzzle.

Desperately he dived for the weapon, and as he rolled toward it he saw
the second man, now wearing the Barrent-1 face, take careful aim.
Barrent-2 felt pain flash through his arm, already torn by the
trichomotred's teeth. He managed to shoot this Barrent-1, and through
a haze of pain faced the third man, now also Barrent-1. His arm was
stiffening rapidly, but he forced himself to press the trigger....

       *       *       *       *       *

_You're playing their game_, Barrent-2 told himself. The
death-conditioning will wear you down, will kill you. _You must see
through it, get past it. It isn't really happening, it's in your
mind_....

But there was no time to think. He was in a large, circular,
high-ceilinged room of stone in the cellars of the Department of
Justice. It was the Trial by Ordeal. Rolling across the floor toward him
was a glistening black machine shaped like a half-sphere, standing
almost four feet high. It came at him, and in the pattern of red, green,
and amber lights he could see the hated face of Barrent-1.

Now his enemy was in its ultimate form: the invariant robot
consciousness, as false and stylized as the conditioned dreams of Earth.
The Barrent-1 machine extruded a single slender tentacle with a white
light winking at the end of it. As it approached, the tentacle withdrew,
and in its place appeared a jointed metal arm ending in a knife-edge.
Barrent-2 dodged, and heard the knife scrape against the stone.

_It isn't what you think it is_, Barrent-2 told himself. _It isn't a
machine, and you are not back on Omega. This is only half of yourself
you are fighting, this is nothing but a deadly illusion._

But he couldn't believe it. The Barrent machine was coming at him again,
its metal hide glistening with a foul green substance which Barrent-2
recognized immediately as Contact Poison. He broke into a sprint, trying
to stay away from the fatal touch.

_It isn't fatal_, he told himself.

Neutralizer washed over the metal surface, clearing away the poison. The
machine tried to ram him. Barrent tried half-heartedly to push it aside.
It crashed into him with stunning force, and he could feel ribs
splintering.

_It isn't real! You're letting a conditioned reflex talk you to death!
You aren't on Omega! You're on Earth, in your own home, staring into a
mirror!_

But the pain was real, and the clubbed metal arm felt real as it crashed
against his shoulder. Barrent staggered away.

He felt horror, not at dying, but at dying too soon, before he could
warn the Omegans of this ultimate danger planted deep in their own
minds. There was no one else to warn of the catastrophe that would
strike each man as he recovered his own specific memories of Earth. To
his best knowledge, no one had experienced this and lived. If _he_ could
live through it, countermeasures could be taken, counterconditioning
could be set up.

He pulled himself to his feet. Coached since childhood in social
responsibility, he thought of it now. He couldn't allow himself to die
when his knowledge was vital to Omega.

_This is not a real machine._

He repeated it to himself as the Barrent machine revved up, picked up
speed, and hurtled toward him from the far side of the room. He forced
himself to see beyond the machine, to see the patient droning lessons of
the classroom which had created this monster in his mind.

_This is not a real machine._

He believed it....

And swung his fist into the hated face reflected in the metal.

There was a moment of dazzling pain, and then he lost consciousness.
When he came to, he was alone in his own home on Earth. His arm and
shoulder ached, and several of his ribs seemed to be broken. On his left
hand he bore the stigmata of the trichomotred's bite.

But with his cut and bleeding right hand he had smashed the mirror. He
had shattered it and Barrent-1 utterly and forever.



                         OMEGA

                       RELIGION:
                 THE WORSHIP OF EVIL

                      PLEASURES:
        THE THRILL OF THE HUNT, WITH HUMAN PREY

                       STATUS:
            ATTAINED ONE CORPSE AT A TIME

                   LIFE EXPECTANCY:
                  THREE EARTH YEARS


  "ALL OF YOU ARE CRIMINALS THEREFORE MANKIND HAS REJECTED YOU,
  AND YOU HAVE BEEN SENT TO A WORLD WHERE YOUR OWN SORT IS KING.
  HERE YOU CAN MAKE YOUR OWN RULES, AND DIE BY THEM ..."

                 THE STATUS CIVILIZATION




Transcriber's List of Corrections

    Chapter One
      Page 1, "futher" changed to "further." (He awoke, rubbed his
    eyes, and waited for further memories to come.)
      Page 9, "ot think" changed to "to think." (All he wanted to
    do was lie down, to sleep, to have a chance to think about his
    situation.)

    Chapter Two
      Page 14, "theif" changed to "thief." (I'm ashamed to admit
    that I can't remember what a credit thief is.)

    Chapter Five
      Page 36, "wtih" changed to "with." (She appeared to be
    dissatisfied with her husband; and divorce was forbidden on
    Omega.)

    Chapter Nine
      Page 65, "murder" changed to "murderer." (Before his visit to
    the Dream Shop he had never felt himself a murderer, no matter
    what the Earth authorities had accused him of.)

    Chapter Sixteen
      Page 107, "undected" changed to "undetected." (By noon,
    Barrent was still undetected.)
      Page 114, "were were" changed to "were." (If he were able to
    get by the city gate, he would have to watch for the hunting
    patrols.)

    Chapter Eighteen
      Page 125, "Barren" changed to "Barrent." (Barrent ducked out
    of a corner in which the creeping vines were trapping him.)

    Chapter Twenty-Three
      Page 151, "coud" changed to "could." (Barrent backed away,
    wondering if a needlebeam could stop it.)

    Chapter Twenty-Four
      Page 159, Added a missing end-quote. (The full facilities of
    this park are waiting for all lovers of the great outdoors.")
      Page 159, "Presumbaly" changed to "Presumably." (Presumably
    they liked this sort of thing.)THE SWEEPER OF LORAY

                          By FINN O'DONNEVAN

                        Illustrated by GOODMAN

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Galaxy Magazine April 1959.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                You wish a universal panacea? A simple
               boon to grant--first decide what part of
               you it is that you wish to have survive!


"Absolutely impossible," declared Professor Carver.

"But I saw it," said Fred, his companion and bodyguard. "Late last
night, I saw it! They carried in this hunter--he had his head half
ripped off--and they--"

"Wait," Professor Carver said, leaning forward expectantly.

They had left their spaceship before dawn, in order to witness the
sunrise ceremonies in the village of Loray, upon the planet of the same
name. Sunrise ceremonies, viewed from a proper distance, are often
colorful and can provide a whole chapter for an anthropologist's book;
but Loray, as usual, proved a disappointment.

Without fanfare, the sun rose, in answers to prayers made to it the
preceding night. Slowly it hoisted its dull red expanse above the
horizon, warming the topmost branches of the great rain-forest that
surrounded the village. And the natives slept on....

Not _all_ the natives. Already the Sweeper was out, cleaning the
debris between huts with his twig broom. He slowly shuffled along,
human-shaped but unutterably alien. The Sweeper's face was a stylized
blank, as though nature had drawn there a preliminary sketch of
intelligent life. His head was strangely knobbed and his skin was
pigmented a dirty gray.

The Sweeper sang to himself as he swept, in a thick, guttural voice. In
only one way was the Sweeper distinguishable from his fellow Lorayans:
painted across his face was a broad black band. This was his mark of
station, the lowest possible station in that primitive society.

"Now then," Professor Carver said, after the sun had arisen without
incident, "a phenomenon such as you describe could not exist. And it
most especially could not exist upon a debased, scrubby little planet
like this."

"I saw what I saw," Fred maintained. "I don't know from impossible,
Professor. I saw it. You want to pass it up, that's up to you."

       *       *       *       *       *

He leaned against the gnarly bole of a stabicus tree, folded his arms
across his meager chest and glowered at the thatch-roofed village. They
had been on Loray for nearly two months and Fred detested the village
more each day.

He was an underweight, unlovely young man and he wore his hair in a
bristling crewcut which accentuated the narrowness of his brow. He
had accompanied the professor for close to ten years, had journeyed
with him to dozens of planets, and had seen many strange and wonderful
things. Everything he saw, however, only increased his contempt for
the Galaxy at large. He desired only to return, wealthy and famous, or
wealthy and unknown, to his home in Bayonne, New Jersey.

"This thing could make us rich," Fred accused. "And _you_ want to pass
it up."

Professor Carver pursed his lips thoughtfully. Wealth was a pleasant
thought, of course. But the professor didn't want to interrupt his
important scientific work to engage in a wild goose chase. He was
now completing his great book, the book that would fully amplify and
document the thesis that he had put forth in his first paper, _Color
Blindness Among the Thang Peoples_. He had expanded the thesis in his
book, _Lack of Coordination in the Drang Race_. He had generalized it
in his monumental _Intelligence Deficiencies Around the Galaxy_,
in which he proved conclusively that intelligence among Non-Terrans
decreases arithmetically as their planet's distance from Terra
increases geometrically.

Now the thesis had come to full flower in Carver's most recent work,
his unifying effort, which was to be titled _Underlying Causes of the
Implicit Inferiority of Non-Terran Peoples_.

"If you're right--" Carver said.

"Look!" Fred cried. "They're bringing in another! See for yourself!"

Professor Carver hesitated. He was a portly, impressive, red-jowled
man, given to slow and deliberate movement. He was dressed in a
tropical explorer's uniform, although Loray was in a temperate zone. He
carried a leather swagger stick, and strapped to his waist was a large
revolver, a twin to the one Fred wore.

"If you're right," Carver said slowly, "it would indeed be, so to
speak, a feather in the cap."

"Come on!" said Fred.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four srag hunters were carrying a wounded companion to the medicine
hut, and Carver and Fred fell in beside them. The hunters were visibly
exhausted; they must have trekked for days to bring their friend to the
village, for the srag hunts ranged deep into the rain-forest.

"Looks done for, huh?" Fred whispered.

Professor Carver nodded. Last month he had photographed a srag, from
a vantage point very high in a very tall, stout tree. He knew it for
a large, ill-tempered, quick-moving beast, with a dismaying array of
claws, teeth and horns. It was also the only non-taboo meat-bearing
animal on the planet. The natives had to kill srags or starve.

But the wounded man had not been quick enough with spear and shield,
and the srag had opened him from throat to pelvis. The hunter had bled
copiously, even though the wound had been hastily bound with dried
grasses. Mercifully, he was unconscious.

"That chap hasn't a chance," Carver remarked. "It's a miracle he's
stayed alive this long. Shock alone, to say nothing of the depth and
extent of the wound--"

"You'll see," Fred said.

The village had suddenly come awake. Men and women, gray-skinned,
knobby-headed, looked silently as the hunters marched toward the
medicine hut. The Sweeper paused to watch. The village's only child
stood before his parents' hut, and, thumb in mouth, stared at the
procession. Deg, the medicine man, came out to meet the hunters,
already wearing his ceremonial mask. The healing dancers assembled,
quickly putting on their makeup.

"Think you can fix him, Doc?" Fred asked.

"One may hope," Deg replied piously.

They entered the dimly lighted medicine hut. The wounded Lorayan was
laid tenderly upon a pallet of grasses and the dancers began to perform
before him. Deg started a solemn chant.

"That'll never do it," Professor Carver pointed out to Fred, with the
interested air of a man watching a steam shovel in operation. "Too late
for faith healing. Listen to his breathing. Shallower, don't you think?"

"Absolutely," Fred said.

Deg finished his chant and bent over the wounded hunter. The Lorayan's
breathing was labored. It slowed, hesitated....

"It is time!" cried the medicine man. He took a small wooden tube out
of his pouch, uncorked it, and held it to the dying man's lips. The
hunter drank. And then--

Carver blinked, and Fred grinned triumphantly. The hunter's breathing
was becoming stronger. As they watched, the great gash became a line of
scar tissue, then a thin pink mark, then an almost invisible white line.

The hunter sat up, scratched his head, grinned foolishly and asked for
something to drink, preferably intoxicating.

Deg declared a festival on the spot.

       *       *       *       *       *

Carver and Fred moved to the edge of the rain-forest for a conference.
The professor walked like a man in a dream. His pendulous lower lip was
thrust out and occasionally he shook his head.

"How about it?" Fred asked.

"It shouldn't be possible," said Carver dazedly. "No substance in
nature should react like that. And you saw it work last night also?"

"Damned well right," Fred said. "They brought in this hunter--he had
his head pulled half off. He swallowed some of that stuff and healed
right before my eyes."

"Man's age-old dream," Carver mused. "A universal panacea!"

"We could get any price for stuff like that," Fred said.

"Yes, we could--as well as performing a duty to science," Professor
Carver reminded him sternly. "Yes, Fred, I think we should obtain some
of that substance."

They turned and, with firm strides, marched back to the village.

Dances were in progress, given by various members of the beast cults.
At the moment, the Sathgohani, a cult representing a medium-sized
deerlike animal, were performing. They could be recognized by the three
red dots on their foreheads. Waiting their turn were the men of the
Dresfeyxi and the Taganyes, cults representing other forest animals.
The beasts adopted by the cults were taboo and there was an absolute
injunction against their slaughter. Carver had been unable to discover
the rationale behind this rule. The Lorayans refused to speak of it.

Deg, the medicine man, had removed his ceremonial mask. He was seated
in front of his hut, watching the dancing. He arose when the Earthmen
approached him.

"Peace!" he said.

"Sure," said Fred. "Nice job you did this morning."

Deg smiled modestly. "The gods answered our prayers."

"The gods?" said Carver. "It looked as though the serum did most of the
work."

"Serum? Oh, the sersee juice!" Deg made a ceremonial gesture as he
mentioned the name. "Yes, the sersee juice is the mother of the Lorayan
people."

"We'd like to buy some," Fred said bluntly, ignoring Professor Carver's
disapproving frown. "What would you take for a gallon?"

"I am sorry," Deg said.

"How about some nice beads? Mirrors? Or maybe a couple of steel knives?"

"It cannot be done," the medicine man asserted. "The sersee juice is
sacred. It must be used only for holy healing."

"Don't hand me that," Fred said, a flush mounting his sallow cheek.
"You gooks think you can--"

"We quite understand," Carver broke in smoothly. "We know about sacred
things. Sacred things are sacred. They are not to be touched by
profane hands."

"Are you crazy?" Fred whispered in English.

"You are a wise man," Deg said gravely. "You understand why I must
refuse you."

"Of course. But it happens, Deg, I am a medicine man in my own country."

"Ah? I did not know this!"

"It is so. As a matter of fact, in my particular line, I am the highest
medicine man."

"Then you must be a very holy man," Deg said, bowing his head.

"Man, he's holy!" Fred put in emphatically. "Holiest man you'll ever
see around here."

"Please, Fred," Carver said, blinking modestly. He said to the medicine
man, "It's true, although I don't like to hear about it. Under the
circumstances, however, you can see that it would not be wrong to give
me some sersee juice. On the contrary, it is your priestly duty to give
me some."

The medicine man pondered for a long time while contrary emotions
passed just barely perceptibly over his almost blank face. At last he
said, "It may be so. Unfortunately, I cannot do what you require."

"Why not?"

"Because there is so little sersee juice, so terribly little. There is
hardly enough for the village."

Deg smiled sadly and walked away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Life in the village continued its simple, invariant way. The Sweeper
moved slowly along, cleaning with his twig broom. The hunters trekked
out in search of srags. The women of the village prepared food and
looked after the village's one child. The priests and dancers prayed
nightly for the sun to rise in the morning. Everyone was satisfied, in
a humble, submissive fashion.

Everyone except the Earthmen.

They had more talks with Deg and slowly learned the complete story of
the sersee juice and the troubles surrounding it.

The sersee bush was a small and sickly affair. It did not flourish in
a state of nature. Yet it resisted cultivation and positively defied
transplantation. The best one could do was to weed thoroughly around it
and hope it would blossom. But most sersee bushes struggled for a year
or two, then gave up the ghost. A few blossomed, and a few out of the
few lived long enough to produce their characteristic red berries.

From the berry of the sersee bush was squeezed the elixir that meant
life to the people of Loray.

"And you must remember," Deg pointed out, "how sparsely the sersee
grows and how widely scattered it is. We must search for months,
sometimes, to find a single bush with berries. And those berries will
save the life of only a single Lorayan, or perhaps two at the most."

"Sad, very sad," Carver said. "But surely some form of intensive
fertilization--"

"Everything has been tried."

"I realize," Carver said earnestly, "how important the sersee juice is
to you. But if you could give us a little--even a pint or two--we could
take it to Earth, have it examined, synthesized, perhaps. Then you
could have all you need."

"But we dare not give any. Have you noticed how few children we have?"

Carver nodded.

"There are very few births. Our life is a constant struggle against
the obliteration of our race. Every man's life must be preserved until
there is a child to replace him. And this can be done only by our
constant and never-ending search for the sersee berries. And there are
never enough," the medicine man sighed. "Never enough."

"Does the juice cure _everything_?" Fred asked.

"It does more than that. Those who have tasted sersee add fifty of our
years to their lives."

Carver opened his eyes wide. Fifty years on Loray was roughly the
equivalent of sixty-three on Earth.

The sersee was more than a healing agent, more than a regenerator. It
was a longevity drug as well.

He paused to consider the prospect of adding another sixty years to his
lifetime. Then he asked, "What happens if a man takes sersee again
after the fifty years?"

"We do not know," Deg told him. "No man would take it a second time
while there is not enough."

Carver and Fred exchanged glances.

"Now listen to me carefully, Deg," Professor Carver said. He spoke of
the sacred duties of science. Science, he told the medicine man, was
above race, above creed, above religion. The advancement of science
was above life itself. What did it matter, after all, if a few more
Lorayans died? They would die eventually anyhow. The important thing
was for Terran science to have a sample of sersee.

"It may be as you say," Deg said. "But my choice is clear. As a priest
of the Sunniheriat religion, I have a sacred trust to preserve the
lives of my people. I cannot go against this trust."

He turned and walked off. The Earthmen frustratedly returned to their
spaceship.

       *       *       *       *       *

After coffee, Professor Carver opened a drawer and took out the
manuscript of _Underlying Causes for the Implicit Inferiority of
Non-Terran Races_. Lovingly he read over the last chapter, the chapter
that dealt with the specialized inferiorities of the Lorayan people.
Then he put the manuscript away.

"Almost finished, Fred," he told his assistant. "Another week's work,
two weeks at the most!"

"Um," Fred replied, staring at the village through a porthole.

"This will do it," Carver said. "This book will prove, once and for
all, the natural superiority of Terrans. We have proven it by force of
arms, Fred, and we have proven it by our technology. Now it is proven
by the impersonal processes of logic."

Fred nodded. He knew the professor was quoting from the book's
introduction.

"Nothing must interfere with the great work," Carver said. "You agree
with that, don't you?"

"Sure," Fred said absent-mindedly. "The book comes first. Put the gooks
in their place."

"Well, I didn't exactly mean that. But you know what I mean. Under the
circumstances, perhaps we should forget about sersee. Perhaps we should
just finish the job we started."

Fred turned and faced his employer. "Professor, how much do you expect
to make out of this book?"

"Hm? Well, the last did quite well, you will remember. This book should
do even better. Ten, perhaps twenty thousand dollars!" He permitted
himself a small smile. "I am fortunate, you see, in my subject matter.
The general public of Earth seems to be rather interested in it, which
is gratifying for a scientist."

"Say you even make fifty thousand. Chicken feed! Do you know what we
could make on a test tube of sersee?"

"A hundred thousand?" Carver said vaguely.

"Are you kidding? Suppose a rich guy was dying and we had the only
thing to cure him. He'd give everything he owned! Millions!"

"I believe you're right," Carver agreed. "And it _would_ be a valuable
scientific advancement.... But the medicine man unfortunately won't
give us any."

"Buying isn't the only way." Fred unholstered his revolver and checked
the chambers.

"I see, I see," Carver said, his red face turning slightly pale. "But
have we the right?"

"What do _you_ think?"

"Well, they _are_ inferior. I believe I have proven that conclusively.
You might indeed say that their lives don't weigh heavily in the scheme
of things. Hm, yes--yes, Fred, we could save Terran lives with this!"

"We could save our own lives," Fred said. "Who wants to punk out ahead
of time?"

Carver stood up and determinedly loosened his gun in its holster.
"Remember," he told Fred, "we are doing this in the name of science,
and for Earth."

"Absolutely, Professor," Fred said, moving toward the port, grinning.

       *       *       *       *       *

They found Deg near the medicine hut. Carver said, without preamble,
"We must have some sersee."

"But I explained to you," said the medicine man. "I told you why it was
impossible."

"We gotta have it," Fred said. He pulled his revolver from its holster
and looked ferociously at Deg.

"No."

"You think I'm kidding?" Fred asked. "You know what this weapon can do?"

"I have seen you use it."

"Maybe you think I won't use it on you."

"I do not care. You can have no sersee."

"I'll shoot," Fred warned, his voice rising angrily. "I swear to you,
I'll shoot."

The villagers of Loray slowly gathered behind their medicine man.
Gray-skinned, knobby-headed, they moved silently into position, the
hunters carrying their spears, other villagers armed with knives and
stones.

"You cannot have the sersee," Deg said.

Fred slowly leveled the revolver.

"Now, Fred," said Carver, "there's an awful lot of them. Do you really
think--"

Fred's thin body tightened and his finger grew taut and white on the
trigger. Carver closed his eyes.

There was a moment of dead silence. Then the revolver exploded. Carver
warily opened his eyes.

The medicine man was still erect, although his knees were shaking.
Fred was pulling back the hammer of the revolver. The villagers had
made no sound. It was a moment before Carver could figure out what had
happened. At last he saw the Sweeper.

The Sweeper lay on his face, his outstretched left hand still clutching
his twig broom, his legs twitching feebly. Blood welled from the hole
Fred had neatly drilled through his forehead.

Deg bent over the Sweeper, then straightened. "He is dead," the
medicine man said.

"That's just the first," Fred warned, taking aim at a hunter.

"No!" cried Deg.

Fred looked at him with raised eyebrows.

"I will give it to you," Deg said. "I will give you all our sersee
juice. Then you must go!"

He ran into the medicine hut and reappeared a moment later with three
wooden tubes, which he thrust into Fred's hands.

"We're in business, Professor," Fred said. "Let's get moving!"

They walked past the silent villagers, toward their spaceship.
Something bright flashed in the sunlight. Fred yipped and dropped his
revolver. Professor Carver hastily scooped it up.

"One of those gooks cut me," Fred said. "Give me the revolver!"

A spear arced high and buried itself at their feet.

"Too many of them," said Carver. "Let's run for it!"

They sprinted to their ship with spears and knives singing around them,
reached it safely and bolted the port.

"Too close," Carver said, panting for breath, leaning against the
dogged port. "Have you got the serum?"

"I got it," said Fred, rubbing his arm. "Damn!"

"What's wrong?"

"My arm. It feels numb."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carver examined the wound, pursed his lips thoughtfully, but made no
comment.

"It's numb," Fred said. "I wonder if they poison those spears."

"It's quite possible," Professor Carver admitted.

"They did!" Fred shouted. "Look, the cut is changing color already!"

The edges of the wound had a blackened, septic look.

"Sulfa," Carver said. "Penicillin, too. I wouldn't worry much about it,
Fred. Modern Terran drugs--"

"--might not even touch this stuff. Open one of those tubes!"

"But, Fred," Carver objected, "we have so little of it. Besides--"

"To hell with that," Fred said. He took one of the tubes and uncorked
it with his teeth.

"Wait, Fred!"

"Wait, nothing!"

Fred drained the contents of the tube and flung it down. Carver said
testily, "I was merely going to point out that the serum should be
tested before an Earthman uses it. We don't know how it'll react on a
human. It was for your own good."

"Sure it was," Fred said mockingly. "Just look at how the stuff is
reacting."

The blackened wound had turned flesh-colored again and was sealing.
Soon there was a line of white scar tissue. Then even that was gone,
leaving firm pink flesh beneath.

"Pretty good, huh?" Fred gloated, with a slight touch of hysteria. "It
works, Professor, it works! Drink one yourself, pal, live another sixty
years. Do you suppose we can synthesize this stuff? Worth a million,
worth ten million, worth a billion. And if we can't, there's always
good old Loray. We can drop back every fifty years or so for a refill.
The stuff even tastes good, Professor. Tastes like--what's wrong?"

Professor Carver was staring at Fred, his eyes wide with astonishment.

"What's the matter?" Fred asked, grinning. "Ain't my seams straight?
What you staring at?"

Carver didn't answer. His mouth trembled. Slowly he backed away.

"What the hell is wrong!" Fred glared at Carver. Then he ran to the
spaceship's head and looked in the mirror.

"_What's happened to me?_"

Carver tried to speak, but no words came. He watched as Fred's features
slowly altered, smoothed, became blank, rudimentary, as though nature
had drawn there a preliminary sketch of intelligent life. Strange knobs
were coming out on Fred's head. His complexion was changing slowly from
pink to gray.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I told you to wait," Carver sighed.

"_What's happening?_" asked Fred in a frightened whimper.

"Well," Carver said, "it must all be residual in the sersee. The
Lorayan birth-rate is practically nonexistent, you know. Even with the
sersee's healing powers, the race should have died out long ago. Unless
the serum had another purpose as well--the ability to change lower
animal forms into the Lorayan form."

"That's a wild guess!"

"A working hypothesis based upon Deg's statement that sersee is the
mother of the Lorayan people. I'm afraid that is the true meaning of
the beast cults and the reason they are taboo. The various beasts must
be the origins of certain portions of the Lorayan people, perhaps
all the Lorayan people. Even the topic is taboo; there clearly is
a deep-seated sense of inferiority about their recent step up from
bestiality."

Carver rubbed his forehead wearily. "The sersee juice has," he
continued, "we may hazard, a role-sharing in terms of the life of the
race. We may theorize--"

"To hell with theory," Fred said, and was horrified to find that his
voice had grown thick and guttural, like a Lorayan voice. "Professor,
do something!"

"There's nothing I can do."

"Maybe Terran science--"

"No, Fred," Carver said quietly.

"_What?_"

"Fred, please try to understand. I can't bring you back to Earth."

"What do you mean? You must be crazy!"

"Not at all. How can I bring you back with such a fantastic story? They
would consider the whole thing a gigantic hoax."

"But--"

"Listen to me. No one would believe! They would consider, rather, that
you were an unusually intelligent Lorayan. Your very presence, Fred,
would undermine the whole thesis of my book!"

"You can't leave me," Fred said. "You just can't do that."

Professor Carver still had both revolvers. He stuck one in his belt and
leveled the other.

"I am not going to endanger the work of a lifetime. Get out, Fred."

"No!"

"I mean it. Get out, Fred."

"I won't! You'll have to shoot me!"

"I will if I must," Carver assured him. "I'll shoot you and throw you
out."

He took aim. Fred backed to the port, undogged it, opened it. The
villagers were waiting quietly outside.

"What will they do to me?"

"I'm really sorry, Fred," Carver said.

"I won't go!" Fred shrieked, gripping the edges of the port with both
hands.

Carver shoved him into the waiting hands of the crowd and threw the
remaining tubes of sersee after him. Then, quickly, not wishing to see
what was going to happen, he sealed the port.

Within an hour, he was leaving the planet's atmospheric limits.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he returned to Earth, his book, _Underlying Causes of the Implicit
Inferiority of Non-Terran Peoples_, was hailed as a milestone in
comparative anthropology. But he ran into some difficulty almost at
once.

A space captain named Jones returned to Earth and maintained that,
on the planet Loray, he had discovered a native who was in every
significant way the equal of a Terran. And he had tape recordings and
motion pictures to prove it.

Carver's thesis seemed in doubt for some time, until Carver examined
the evidence for himself. Then he pointed out, with merciless logic,
that the so-called super-Lorayan, this paragon of Loray, this supposed
equal of Terran humanity, occupied the lowest position in the Lorayan
hierarchy, the position of Sweeper, clearly shown by the broad black
stripe across his face.

The space captain admitted that this was true.

Why then, Carver thundered, was this Lorayan Superior not able, in
spite of his so-called abilities, to reach any higher position in the
debased society in which he dwelt?

The question silenced the space captain and his supporters, demolished
the entire school, as a matter of fact. And the Carverian Doctrine of
the Implicit Inferiority of Non-Terrans is now accepted by reasoning
Terrans everywhere in the Galaxy.warm

By ROBERT SHECKLEY


 _It was a joyous journey Anders
 set out on ... to reach his goal
 ... but look where he wound up!_


Illustrated by EMSH


Anders lay on his bed, fully dressed except for his shoes and black bow
tie, contemplating, with a certain uneasiness, the evening before him.
In twenty minutes he would pick up Judy at her apartment, and that was
the uneasy part of it.

He had realized, only seconds ago, that he was in love with her.

Well, he'd tell her. The evening would be memorable. He would propose,
there would be kisses, and the seal of acceptance would, figuratively
speaking, be stamped across his forehead.

Not too pleasant an outlook, he decided. It really would be much more
comfortable not to be in love. What had done it? A look, a touch, a
thought? It didn't take much, he knew, and stretched his arms for a
thorough yawn.

"Help me!" a voice said.

His muscles spasmed, cutting off the yawn in mid-moment. He sat upright
on the bed, then grinned and lay back again.

"You must help me!" the voice insisted.

Anders sat up, reached for a polished shoe and fitted it on, giving his
full attention to the tying of the laces.

"Can you hear me?" the voice asked. "You can, can't you?"

That did it. "Yes, I can hear you," Anders said, still in a high good
humor. "Don't tell me you're my guilty subconscious, attacking me for a
childhood trauma I never bothered to resolve. I suppose you want me to
join a monastery."

"I don't know what you're talking about," the voice said. "I'm no one's
subconscious. I'm _me_. Will you help me?"

Anders believed in voices as much as anyone; that is, he didn't believe
in them at all, until he heard them. Swiftly he catalogued the
possibilities. Schizophrenia was the best answer, of course, and one in
which his colleagues would concur. But Anders had a lamentable
confidence in his own sanity. In which case--

"Who are you?" he asked.

"I don't know," the voice answered.

Anders realized that the voice was speaking within his own mind. Very
suspicious.

"You don't know who you are," Anders stated. "Very well. _Where_ are
you?"

"I don't know that, either." The voice paused, and went on. "Look, I
know how ridiculous this must sound. Believe me, I'm in some sort of
limbo. I don't know how I got here or who I am, but I want desperately
to get out. Will you help me?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Still fighting the idea of a voice speaking within his head, Anders knew
that his next decision was vital. He had to accept--or reject--his own
sanity.

He accepted it.

"All right," Anders said, lacing the other shoe. "I'll grant that you're
a person in trouble, and that you're in some sort of telepathic contact
with me. Is there anything else you can tell me?"

"I'm afraid not," the voice said, with infinite sadness. "You'll have to
find out for yourself."

"Can you contact anyone else?"

"No."

"Then how can you talk with me?"

"I don't know."

Anders walked to his bureau mirror and adjusted his black bow tie,
whistling softly under his breath. Having just discovered that he was in
love, he wasn't going to let a little thing like a voice in his mind
disturb him.

"I really don't see how I can be of any help," Anders said, brushing a
bit of lint from his jacket. "You don't know where you are, and there
don't seem to be any distinguishing landmarks. How am I to find you?" He
turned and looked around the room to see if he had forgotten anything.

"I'll know when you're close," the voice said. "You were warm just
then."

"Just then?" All he had done was look around the room. He did so again,
turning his head slowly. Then it happened.

The room, from one angle, looked different. It was suddenly a mixture of
muddled colors, instead of the carefully blended pastel shades he had
selected. The lines of wall, floor and ceiling were strangely off
proportion, zigzag, unrelated.

Then everything went back to normal.

"You were _very_ warm," the voice said. "It's a question of seeing
things correctly."

Anders resisted the urge to scratch his head, for fear of disarranging
his carefully combed hair. What he had seen wasn't so strange. Everyone
sees one or two things in his life that make him doubt his normality,
doubt sanity, doubt his very existence. For a moment the orderly
Universe is disarranged and the fabric of belief is ripped.

But the moment passes.

Anders remembered once, as a boy, awakening in his room in the middle of
the night. How strange everything had looked. Chairs, table, all out of
proportion, swollen in the dark. The ceiling pressing down, as in a
dream.

But that had also passed.

"Well, old man," he said, "if I get warm again, let me know."

"I will," the voice in his head whispered. "I'm sure you'll find me."

"I'm glad you're so sure," Anders said gaily, switched off the lights
and left.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lovely and smiling, Judy greeted him at the door. Looking at her, Anders
sensed her knowledge of the moment. Had she felt the change in him, or
predicted it? Or was love making him grin like an idiot?

"Would you like a before-party drink?" she asked.

He nodded, and she led him across the room, to the improbable
green-and-yellow couch. Sitting down, Anders decided he would tell her
when she came back with the drink. No use in putting off the fatal
moment. A lemming in love, he told himself.

"You're getting warm again," the voice said.

He had almost forgotten his invisible friend. Or fiend, as the case
could well be. What would Judy say if she knew he was hearing voices?
Little things like that, he reminded himself, often break up the best of
romances.

"Here," she said, handing him a drink.

Still smiling, he noticed. The number two smile--to a prospective
suitor, provocative and understanding. It had been preceded, in
their relationship, by the number one nice-girl smile, the
don't-misunderstand-me smile, to be worn on all occasions, until
the correct words have been mumbled.

"That's right," the voice said. "It's in how you look at things."

Look at what? Anders glanced at Judy, annoyed at his thoughts. If he was
going to play the lover, let him play it. Even through the astigmatic
haze of love, he was able to appreciate her blue-gray eyes, her fine
skin (if one overlooked a tiny blemish on the left temple), her lips,
slightly reshaped by lipstick.

"How did your classes go today?" she asked.

Well, of course she'd ask that, Anders thought. Love is marking time.

"All right," he said. "Teaching psychology to young apes--"

"Oh, come now!"

"Warmer," the voice said.

What's the matter with me, Anders wondered. She really is a lovely girl.
The _gestalt_ that is Judy, a pattern of thoughts, expressions,
movements, making up the girl I--

I what?

Love?

Anders shifted his long body uncertainly on the couch. He didn't quite
understand how this train of thought had begun. It annoyed him. The
analytical young instructor was better off in the classroom. Couldn't
science wait until 9:10 in the morning?

"I was thinking about you today," Judy said, and Anders knew that she
had sensed the change in his mood.

"Do you see?" the voice asked him. "You're getting much better at it."

"I don't see anything," Anders thought, but the voice was right. It was
as though he had a clear line of inspection into Judy's mind. Her
feelings were nakedly apparent to him, as meaningless as his room had
been in that flash of undistorted thought.

"I really was thinking about you," she repeated.

"Now look," the voice said.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Anders, watching the expressions on Judy's face, felt the strangeness
descend on him. He was back in the nightmare perception of that moment
in his room. This time it was as though he were watching a machine in a
laboratory. The object of this operation was the evocation and
preservation of a particular mood. The machine goes through a searching
process, invoking trains of ideas to achieve the desired end.

"Oh, were you?" he asked, amazed at his new perspective.

"Yes ... I wondered what you were doing at noon," the reactive machine
opposite him on the couch said, expanding its shapely chest slightly.

"Good," the voice said, commending him for his perception.

"Dreaming of you, of course," he said to the flesh-clad skeleton behind
the total _gestalt_ Judy. The flesh machine rearranged its limbs,
widened its mouth to denote pleasure. The mechanism searched through a
complex of fears, hopes, worries, through half-remembrances of analogous
situations, analogous solutions.

And this was what he loved. Anders saw too clearly and hated himself for
seeing. Through his new nightmare perception, the absurdity of the
entire room struck him.

"Were you really?" the articulating skeleton asked him.

"You're coming closer," the voice whispered.

To what? The personality? There was no such thing. There was no true
cohesion, no depth, nothing except a web of surface reactions, stretched
across automatic visceral movements.

He was coming closer to the truth.

"Sure," he said sourly.

The machine stirred, searching for a response.

Anders felt a quick tremor of fear at the sheer alien quality of his
viewpoint. His sense of formalism had been sloughed off, his agreed-upon
reactions bypassed. What would be revealed next?

He was seeing clearly, he realized, as perhaps no man had ever seen
before. It was an oddly exhilarating thought.

But could he still return to normality?

"Can I get you a drink?" the reaction machine asked.

At that moment Anders was as thoroughly out of love as a man could be.
Viewing one's intended as a depersonalized, sexless piece of machinery
is not especially conducive to love. But it is quite stimulating,
intellectually.

Anders didn't want normality. A curtain was being raised and he wanted
to see behind it. What was it some Russian scientist--Ouspensky, wasn't
it--had said?

"_Think in other categories._"

That was what he was doing, and would continue to do.

"Good-by," he said suddenly.

The machine watched him, open-mouthed, as he walked out the door.
Delayed circuit reactions kept it silent until it heard the elevator
door close.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You were very warm in there," the voice within his head whispered, once
he was on the street. "But you still don't understand everything."

"Tell me, then," Anders said, marveling a little at his equanimity. In
an hour he had bridged the gap to a completely different viewpoint, yet
it seemed perfectly natural.

"I can't," the voice said. "You must find it yourself."

"Well, let's see now," Anders began. He looked around at the masses of
masonry, the convention of streets cutting through the architectural
piles. "Human life," he said, "is a series of conventions. When you look
at a girl, you're supposed to see--a pattern, not the underlying
formlessness."

"That's true," the voice agreed, but with a shade of doubt.

"Basically, there is no form. Man produces _gestalts_, and cuts form out
of the plethora of nothingness. It's like looking at a set of lines and
saying that they represent a figure. We look at a mass of material,
extract it from the background and say it's a man. But in truth there is
no such thing. There are only the humanizing features that
we--myopically--attach to it. Matter is conjoined, a matter of
viewpoint."

"You're not seeing it now," said the voice.

"Damn it," Anders said. He was certain that he was on the track of
something big, perhaps something ultimate. "Everyone's had the
experience. At some time in his life, everyone looks at a familiar
object and can't make any sense out of it. Momentarily, the _gestalt_
fails, but the true moment of sight passes. The mind reverts to the
superimposed pattern. Normalcy continues."

The voice was silent. Anders walked on, through the _gestalt_ city.

"There's something else, isn't there?" Anders asked.

"Yes."

What could that be, he asked himself. Through clearing eyes, Anders
looked at the formality he had called his world.

He wondered momentarily if he would have come to this if the voice
hadn't guided him. Yes, he decided after a few moments, it was
inevitable.

But who was the voice? And what had he left out?

"Let's see what a party looks like now," he said to the voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

The party was a masquerade; the guests were all wearing their faces. To
Anders, their motives, individually and collectively, were painfully
apparent. Then his vision began to clear further.

He saw that the people weren't truly individual. They were discontinuous
lumps of flesh sharing a common vocabulary, yet not even truly
discontinuous.

The lumps of flesh were a part of the decoration of the room and almost
indistinguishable from it. They were one with the lights, which lent
their tiny vision. They were joined to the sounds they made, a few
feeble tones out of the great possibility of sound. They blended into
the walls.

The kaleidoscopic view came so fast that Anders had trouble sorting his
new impressions. He knew now that these people existed only as patterns,
on the same basis as the sounds they made and the things they thought
they saw.

_Gestalts_, sifted out of the vast, unbearable real world.

"Where's Judy?" a discontinuous lump of flesh asked him. This particular
lump possessed enough nervous mannerisms to convince the other lumps of
his reality. He wore a loud tie as further evidence.

"She's sick," Anders said. The flesh quivered into an instant sympathy.
Lines of formal mirth shifted to formal woe.

"Hope it isn't anything serious," the vocal flesh remarked.

"You're warmer," the voice said to Anders.

Anders looked at the object in front of him.

"She hasn't long to live," he stated.

The flesh quivered. Stomach and intestines contracted in sympathetic
fear. Eyes distended, mouth quivered.

The loud tie remained the same.

"My God! You don't mean it!"

"What are you?" Anders asked quietly.

"What do you mean?" the indignant flesh attached to the tie demanded.
Serene within its reality, it gaped at Anders. Its mouth twitched,
undeniable proof that it was real and sufficient. "You're drunk," it
sneered.

Anders laughed and left the party.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There is still something you don't know," the voice said. "But you were
hot! I could feel you near me."

"What are you?" Anders asked again.

"I don't know," the voice admitted. "I am a person. I am I. I am
trapped."

"So are we all," Anders said. He walked on asphalt, surrounded by heaps
of concrete, silicates, aluminum and iron alloys. Shapeless, meaningless
heaps that made up the _gestalt_ city.

And then there were the imaginary lines of demarcation dividing city
from city, the artificial boundaries of water and land.

All ridiculous.

"Give me a dime for some coffee, mister?" something asked, a thing
indistinguishable from any other thing.

"Old Bishop Berkeley would give a nonexistent dime to your nonexistent
presence," Anders said gaily.

"I'm really in a bad way," the voice whined, and Anders perceived that
it was no more than a series of modulated vibrations.

"Yes! Go on!" the voice commanded.

"If you could spare me a quarter--" the vibrations said, with a deep
pretense at meaning.

No, what was there behind the senseless patterns? Flesh, mass. What was
that? All made up of atoms.

"I'm really hungry," the intricately arranged atoms muttered.

All atoms. Conjoined. There were no true separations between atom and
atom. Flesh was stone, stone was light. Anders looked at the masses of
atoms that were pretending to solidity, meaning and reason.

"Can't you help me?" a clump of atoms asked. But the clump was identical
with all the other atoms. Once you ignored the superimposed patterns,
you could see the atoms were random, scattered.

"I don't believe in you," Anders said.

The pile of atoms was gone.

"Yes!" the voice cried. "Yes!"

"I don't believe in any of it," Anders said. After all, what was an
atom?

"Go on!" the voice shouted. "You're hot! Go on!"

What was an atom? An empty space surrounded by an empty space.

Absurd!

"Then it's all false!" Anders said. And he was alone under the stars.

"That's right!" the voice within his head screamed. "Nothing!"

But stars, Anders thought. How can one believe--

The stars disappeared. Anders was in a gray nothingness, a void. There
was nothing around him except shapeless gray.

Where was the voice?

Gone.

Anders perceived the delusion behind the grayness, and then there was
nothing at all.

Complete nothingness, and himself within it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Where was he? What did it mean? Anders' mind tried to add it up.

Impossible. _That_ couldn't be true.

Again the score was tabulated, but Anders' mind couldn't accept the
total. In desperation, the overloaded mind erased the figures,
eradicated the knowledge, erased itself.

"Where am I?"

In nothingness. Alone.

Trapped.

"Who am I?"

A voice.

The voice of Anders searched the nothingness, shouted, "Is there anyone
here?"

No answer.

But there was someone. All directions were the same, yet moving along
one he could make contact ... with someone. The voice of Anders reached
back to someone who could save him, perhaps.

"Save me," the voice said to Anders, lying fully dressed on his bed,
except for his shoes and black bow tie.

                                                     --ROBERT SHECKLEY




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ June 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.[Illustration: Illustrated by SCATTERGOOD]


    By
  ROBERT
 SHECKLEY

 WARRIOR
  RACE


 _Destroying the spirit of the enemy is the
 goal of war and the aliens had the best way!_


They never did discover whose fault it was. Fannia pointed out that if
Donnaught had had the brains of an ox, as well as the build, he would
have remembered to check the tanks. Donnaught, although twice as big as
him, wasn't quite as fast with an insult. He intimated, after a little
thought, that Fannia's nose might have obstructed his reading of the
fuel gauge.

This still left them twenty light-years from Thetis, with a cupful of
transformer fuel in the emergency tank.

"All right," Fannia said presently. "What's done is done. We can squeeze
about three light-years out of the fuel before we're back on atomics.
Hand me _The Galactic Pilot_--unless you forgot that, too."

Donnaught dragged the bulky microfilm volume out of its locker, and they
explored its pages.

_The Galactic Pilot_ told them they were in a sparse, seldom-visited
section of space, which they already knew. The nearest planetary system
was Hatterfield; no intelligent life there. Sersus had a native
population, but no refueling facilities. The same with Illed, Hung and
Porderai.

"Ah-ha!" Fannia said. "Read that, Donnaught. If you can read, that is."

"Cascella," Donnaught read, slowly and clearly, following the line with
a thick forefinger. "Type M sun. Three planets, intelligent (AA3C)
human-type life on second. Oxygen-breathers. Non-mechanical. Religious.
Friendly. Unique social structure, described in Galactic Survey Report
33877242. Population estimate: stable at three billion. Basic Cascellan
vocabulary taped under Cas33b2. Scheduled for resurvey 2375 A.D. Cache
of transformer fuel left, beam coordinate 8741 kgl. Physical descript:
Unocc. flatland."

"Transformer fuel, boy!" Fannia said gleefully. "I believe we will get
to Thetis, after all." He punched the new direction on the ship's tape.
"If that fuel's still there."

"Should we read up on the unique social structure?" Donnaught asked,
still poring over _The Galactic Pilot_.

"Certainly," Fannia said. "Just step over to the main galactic base on
Earth and buy me a copy."

"I forgot," Donnaught admitted slowly.

"Let me see," Fannia said, dragging out the ship's language library,
"Cascellan, Cascellan ... Here it is. Be good while I learn the
language." He set the tape in the hypnophone and switched it on.
"Another useless tongue in my overstuffed head," he murmured, and then
the hypnophone took over.

       *       *       *       *       *

Coming out of transformer drive with at least a drop of fuel left, they
switched to atomics. Fannia rode the beam right across the planet,
locating the slender metal spire of the Galactic Survey cache. The plain
was no longer unoccupied, however. The Cascellans had built a city
around the cache, and the spire dominated the crude wood-and-mud
buildings.

"Hang on," Fannia said, and brought the ship down on the outskirts of
the city, in a field of stubble.

"Now look," Fannia said, unfastening his safety belt. "We're just here
for fuel. No souvenirs, no side-trips, no fraternizing."

Through the port, they could see a cloud of dust from the city. As it
came closer, they made out figures running toward their ship.

"What do you think this unique social structure is?" Donnaught asked,
pensively checking the charge in a needler gun.

"I know not and care less," Fannia said, struggling into space armor.
"Get dressed."

"The air's breathable."

"Look, pachyderm, for all we know, these Cascellans think the proper way
to greet visitors is to chop off their heads and stuff them with green
apples. If Galactic says unique, it probably means unique."

"Galactic said they were friendly."

"That means they haven't got atomic bombs. Come on, get dressed."
Donnaught put down the needler and struggled into an oversize suit of
space armor. Both men strapped on needlers, paralyzers, and a few
grenades.

"I don't think we have anything to worry about," Fannia said, tightening
the last nut on his helmet. "Even if they get rough, they can't crack
space armor. And if they're not rough, we won't have any trouble. Maybe
these gewgaws will help." He picked up a box of trading
articles--mirrors, toys and the like.

Helmeted and armored, Fannia slid out the port and raised one hand to
the Cascellans. The language, hypnotically placed in his mind, leaped to
his lips.

"We come as friends and brothers. Take us to the chief."

The natives clustered around, gaping at the ship and the space armor.
Although they had the same number of eyes, ears and limbs as humans,
they completely missed looking like them.

"If they're friendly," Donnaught asked, climbing out of the port, "why
all the hardware?" The Cascellans were dressed predominantly in a
collection of knives, swords and daggers. Each man had at least five,
and some had eight or nine.

"Maybe Galactic got their signals crossed," Fannia said, as the natives
spread out in an escort. "Or maybe the natives just use the knives for
mumblypeg."

       *       *       *       *       *

The city was typical of a non-mechanical culture. Narrow, packed-dirt
streets twisted between ramshackle huts. A few two-story buildings
threatened to collapse at any minute. A stench filled the air, so strong
that Fannia's filter couldn't quite eradicate it. The Cascellans
bounded ahead of the heavily laden Earthmen, dashing around like a pack
of playful puppies. Their knives glittered and clanked.

The chief's house was the only three-story building in the city. The
tall spire of the cache was right behind it.

"If you come in peace," the chief said when they entered, "you are
welcome." He was a middle-aged Cascellan with at least fifteen knives
strapped to various parts of his person. He squatted cross-legged on a
raised dais.

"We are privileged," Fannia said. He remembered from the hypnotic
language lesson that "chief" on Cascella meant more than it usually did
on Earth. The chief here was a combination of king, high priest, deity
and bravest warrior.

"We have a few simple gifts here," Fannia added, placing the gewgaws at
the king's feet. "Will his majesty accept?"

"No," the king said. "We accept no gifts." Was that the unique social
structure? Fannia wondered. It certainly was not human. "We are a
warrior race. What we want, we take."

Fannia sat cross-legged in front of the dais and exchanged conversation
with the king while Donnaught played with the spurned toys. Trying to
overcome the initial bad impression, Fannia told the chief about the
stars and other worlds, since simple people usually liked fables. He
spoke of the ship, not mentioning yet that it was out of fuel. He spoke
of Cascella, telling the chief how its fame was known throughout the
Galaxy.

"That is as it should be," the chief said proudly. "We are a race of
warriors, the like of which has never been seen. Every man of us dies
fighting."

"You must have fought some great wars," Fannia said politely, wondering
what idiot had written up the galactic report.

"I have not fought a war for many years," the chief said. "We are united
now, and all our enemies have joined us."

Bit by bit, Fannia led up to the matter of the fuel.

"What is this 'fuel'?" the chief asked, haltingly because there was no
equivalent for it in the Cascellan language.

"It makes our ship go."

"And where is it?"

"In the metal spire," Fannia said. "If you would just allow us--"

"In the holy shrine?" the chief exclaimed, shocked. "The tall metal
church which the gods left here long ago?"

"Yeah," Fannia said sadly, knowing what was coming. "I guess that's
it."

"It is sacrilege for an outworlder to go near it," the chief said. "I
forbid it."

"We need the fuel." Fannia was getting tired of sitting cross-legged.
Space armor wasn't built for complicated postures. "The spire was put
here for such emergencies."

"Strangers, know that I am god of my people, as well as their leader. If
you dare approach the sacred temple, there will be war."

"I was afraid of that," Fannia said, getting to his feet.

"And since we are a race of warriors," the chief said, "at my command,
every fighting man of the planet will move against you. More will come
from the hills and from across the rivers."

Abruptly, the chief drew a knife. It must have been a signal, because
every native in the room did the same.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fannia dragged Donnaught away from the toys. "Look, lummox. These
friendly warriors can't do a damn thing to us. Those knives can't cut
space armor, and I doubt if they have anything better. Don't let them
pile up on you, though. Use the paralyzer first, the needler if they
really get thick."

"Right." Donnaught whisked out and primed a paralyzer in a single
coordinated movement. With weapons, Donnaught was fast and reliable,
which was virtue enough for Fannia to keep him as a partner.

"We'll cut around this building and grab the fuel. Two cans ought to be
enough. Then we'll beat it fast."

They walked out the building, followed by the Cascellans. Four carriers
lifted the chief, who was barking orders. The narrow street outside was
suddenly jammed with armed natives. No one tried to touch them yet, but
at least a thousand knives were flashing in the sun.

In front of the cache was a solid phalanx of Cascellans. They stood
behind a network of ropes that probably marked the boundary between
sacred and profane ground.

"Get set for it," Fannia said, and stepped over the ropes.

Immediately the foremost temple guard raised his knife. Fannia brought
up the paralyzer, not firing it yet, still moving forward.

The foremost native shouted something, and the knife swept across in a
glittering arc. The Cascellan gurgled something else, staggered and
fell. Bright blood oozed from his throat.

"I _told_ you not to use the needler yet!" Fannia said.

"I didn't," Donnaught protested. Glancing back, Fannia saw that
Donnaught's needler was still holstered.

"Then I don't get it," said Fannia bewilderedly.

Three more natives bounded forward, their knives held high. They tumbled
to the ground also. Fannia stopped and watched as a platoon of natives
advanced on them.

Once they were within stabbing range of the Earthmen, the natives were
slitting their own throats!

Fannia was frozen for a moment, unable to believe his eyes. Donnaught
halted behind him.

Natives were rushing forward by the hundreds now, their knives poised,
screaming at the Earthmen. As they came within range, each native
stabbed himself, tumbling on a quickly growing pile of bodies. In
minutes the Earthmen were surrounded by a heap of bleeding Cascellan
flesh, which was steadily growing higher.

"All right!" Fannia shouted. "Stop it." He yanked Donnaught back with
him, to profane ground. "Truce!" he yelled in Cascellan.

The crowd parted and the chief was carried through. With two knives
clenched in his fists, he was panting from excitement.

"We have won the first battle!" he said proudly. "The might of our
warriors frightens even such aliens as yourselves. You shall not profane
our temple while a man is alive on Cascella!"

The natives shouted their approval and triumph.

The two aliens dazedly stumbled back to their ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

"So that's what Galactic meant by 'a unique social structure,'" Fannia
said morosely. He stripped off his armor and lay down on his bunk.
"Their way of making war is to suicide their enemies into capitulation."

"They must be nuts," Donnaught grumbled. "That's no way to fight."

"It works, doesn't it?" Fannia got up and stared out a porthole. The sun
was setting, painting the city a charming red in its glow. The beams of
light glistened off the spire of the Galactic cache. Through the open
doorway they could hear the boom and rattle of drums. "Tribal call to
arms," Fannia said.

"I still say it's crazy." Donnaught had some definite ideas on fighting.
"It ain't human."

"I'll buy that. The idea seems to be that if enough people slaughter
themselves, the enemy gives up out of sheer guilty conscience."

"What if the enemy doesn't give up?"

"Before these people united, they must have fought it out tribe to
tribe, suiciding until someone gave up. The losers probably joined the
victors; the tribe must have grown until it could take over the planet
by sheer weight of numbers." Fannia looked carefully at Donnaught,
trying to see if he understood. "It's anti-survival, of course; if
someone didn't give up, the race would probably kill themselves." He
shook his head. "But war of any kind is anti-survival. Perhaps they've
got rules."

"Couldn't we just barge in and grab the fuel quick?" Donnaught asked.
"And get out before they all killed themselves?"

"I don't think so," Fannia said. "They might go on committing suicide
for the next ten years, figuring they were still fighting us." He looked
thoughtfully at the city. "It's that chief of theirs. He's their god and
he'd probably keep them suiciding until he was the only man left. Then
he'd grin, say, 'We are great warriors,' and kill himself."

Donnaught shrugged his big shoulders in disgust. "Why don't we knock him
off?"

"They'd just elect another god." The sun was almost below the horizon
now. "I've got an idea, though," Fannia said. He scratched his head. "It
might work. All we can do is try."

       *       *       *       *       *

At midnight, the two men sneaked out of the ship, moving silently into
the city. They were both dressed in space armor again. Donnaught carried
two empty fuel cans. Fannia had his paralyzer out.

The streets were dark and silent as they slid along walls and around
posts, keeping out of sight. A native turned a corner suddenly, but
Fannia paralyzed him before he could make a sound.

They crouched in the darkness, in the mouth of an alley facing the
cache.

"Have you got it straight?" Fannia asked. "I paralyze the guards. You
bolt in and fill up those cans. We get the hell out of here, quick. When
they check, they find the cans still there. Maybe they won't commit
suicide then."

The men moved across the shadowy steps in front of the cache. There were
three Cascellans guarding the entrance, their knives stuck in their
loincloths. Fannia stunned them with a medium charge, and Donnaught
broke into a run.

Torches instantly flared, natives boiled out of every alleyway,
shouting, waving their knives.

"We've been ambushed!" Fannia shouted. "Get back here, Donnaught!"

Donnaught hurriedly retreated. The natives had been waiting for them.
Screaming, yowling, they rushed at the Earthmen, slitting their own
throats at five-foot range. Bodies tumbled in front of Fannia, almost
tripping him as he backed up. Donnaught caught him by an arm and yanked
him straight. They ran out of the sacred area.

"Truce, damn it!" Fannia called out. "Let me speak to the chief. Stop
it! Stop it! I want a truce!"

Reluctantly, the Cascellans stopped their slaughter.

"This is war," the chief said, striding forward. His almost human face
was stern under the torchlight. "You have seen our warriors. You know
now that you cannot stand against them. The word has spread to all our
lands. My entire people are prepared to do battle."

He looked proudly at his fellow-Cascellans, then back to the Earthmen.
"I myself will lead my people into battle now. There will be no stopping
us. We will fight until you surrender yourselves completely, stripping
off your armor."

"Wait, Chief," Fannia panted, sick at the sight of so much blood. The
clearing was a scene out of the Inferno. Hundreds of bodies were
sprawled around. The streets were muddy with blood.

"Let me confer with my partner tonight. I will speak with you tomorrow."

"No," the chief said. "You started the battle. It must go to its
conclusion. Brave men wish to die in battle. It is our fondest wish. You
are the first enemy we have had in many years, since we subdued the
mountain tribes."

"Sure," Fannia said. "But let's talk about it--"

"I myself will fight you," the chief said, holding up a dagger. "I will
die for my people, as a warrior must!"

"Hold it!" Fannia shouted. "Grant us a truce. We are allowed to fight
only by sunlight. It is a tribal taboo."

The chief thought for a moment, then said, "Very well. Until tomorrow."

The beaten Earthmen walked slowly back to their ship amid the jeers of
the victorious populace.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning, Fannia still didn't have a plan. He knew that he had to
have fuel; he wasn't planning on spending the rest of his life on
Cascella, or waiting until the Galactic Survey sent another ship, in
fifty years or so. On the other hand, he hesitated at the idea of being
responsible for the death of anywhere up to three billion people. It
wouldn't be a very good record to take to Thetis. The Galactic Survey
might find out about it. Anyway, he just wouldn't do it.

He was stuck both ways.

Slowly, the two men walked out to meet the chief. Fannia was still
searching wildly for an idea while listening to the drums booming.

"If there was only someone we could fight," Donnaught mourned, looking
at his useless blasters.

"That's the deal," Fannia said. "Guilty conscience is making sinners of
us all, or something like that. They expect us to give in before the
carnage gets out of hand." He considered for a moment. "It's not so
crazy, actually. On Earth, armies don't usually fight until every last
man is slaughtered on one side. Someone surrenders when they've had
enough."

"If they'd just fight _us_!"

"Yeah, if they only--" He stopped. "We'll fight each other!" he said.
"These people look at suicide as war. Wouldn't they look upon war--real
fighting--as suicide?"

"What good would that do us?" Donnaught asked.

They were coming into the city now and the streets were lined with armed
natives. Around the city there were thousands more. Natives were filling
the plain, as far as the eye could see. Evidently they had responded to
the drums and were here to do battle with the aliens.

Which meant, of course, a wholesale suicide.

"Look at it this way," Fannia said. "If a guy plans on suiciding on
Earth, what do we do?"

"Arrest him?" Donnaught asked.

"Not at first. We offer him anything he wants, if he just won't do it.
People offer the guy money, a job, their daughters, anything, just so he
won't do it. It's taboo on Earth."

"So?"

"So," Fannia went on, "maybe fighting is just as taboo here. Maybe
they'll offer us fuel, if we'll just stop."

Donnaught looked dubious, but Fannia felt it was worth a try.

       *       *       *       *       *

They pushed their way through the crowded city, to the entrance of the
cache. The chief was waiting for them, beaming on his people like a
jovial war god.

"Are you ready to do battle?" he asked. "Or to surrender?"

"Sure," Fannia said. "Now, Donnaught!"

He swung, and his mailed fist caught Donnaught in the ribs. Donnaught
blinked.

"Come on, you idiot, hit me back."

Donnaught swung, and Fannia staggered from the force of the blow. In a
second they were at it like a pair of blacksmiths, mailed blows ringing
from their armored hides.

"A little lighter," Fannia gasped, picking himself up from the ground.
"You're denting my ribs." He belted Donnaught viciously on the helmet.

"Stop it!" the chief cried. "This is disgusting!"

"It's working," Fannia panted. "Now let me strangle you. I think that
might do it."

Donnaught obliged by falling to the ground. Fannia clamped both hands
around Donnaught's armored neck, and squeezed.

"Make believe you're in agony, idiot," he said.

Donnaught groaned and moaned as convincingly as he could.

"You must stop!" the chief screamed. "It is terrible to kill another!"

"Then let me get some fuel," Fannia said, tightening his grip on
Donnaught's throat.

The chief thought it over for a little while. Then he shook his head.

"No."

"What?"

"You are aliens. If you want to do this disgraceful thing, do it. But
you shall not profane our religious relics."

       *       *       *       *       *

Donnaught and Fannia staggered to their feet. Fannia was exhausted from
fighting in the heavy space armor; he barely made it up.

"Now," the chief said, "surrender at once. Take off your armor or do
battle with us."

The thousands of warriors--possibly millions, because more were arriving
every second--shouted their blood-wrath. The cry was taken up on the
outskirts and echoed to the hills, where more fighting men were pouring
down into the crowded plain.

Fannia's face contorted. He couldn't give himself and Donnaught up to
the Cascellans. They might be cooked at the next church supper. For a
moment he considered going after the fuel and letting the damned fools
suicide all they pleased.

His mind an angry blank, Fannia staggered forward and hit the chief in
the face with a mailed glove.

The chief went down, and the natives backed away in horror. Quickly, the
chief snapped out a knife and brought it up to his throat. Fannia's
hands closed on the chief's wrists.

"Listen to me," Fannia croaked. "We're going to take that fuel. If any
man makes a move--if anyone kills himself--I'll kill your chief."

The natives milled around uncertainly. The chief was struggling wildly
in Fannia's hands, trying to get a knife to his throat, so he could die
honorably.

"Get it," Fannia told Donnaught, "and hurry it up."

The natives were uncertain just what to do. They had their knives poised
at their throats, ready to plunge if battle was joined.

"Don't do it," Fannia warned. "I'll kill the chief and then he'll never
die a warrior's death."

The chief was still trying to kill himself. Desperately, Fannia held on,
knowing he had to keep him from suicide in order to hold the threat of
death over him.

"Listen, Chief," Fannia said, eying the uncertain crowd. "I must have
your promise there'll be no more war between us. Either I get it or I
kill you."

"Warriors!" the chief roared. "Choose a new ruler. Forget me and do
battle!"

The Cascellans were still uncertain, but knives started to lift.

"If you do it," Fannia shouted in despair, "I'll kill your chief. _I'll
kill all of you!_"

That stopped them.

"I have powerful magic in my ship. I can kill every last man, and then
you won't be able to die a warrior's death. _Or_ get to heaven!"

The chief tried to free himself with a mighty surge that almost tore one
of his arms free, but Fannia held on, pinning both arms behind his back.

"Very well," the chief said, tears springing into his eyes. "A warrior
must die by his own hand. You have won, alien."

The crowd shouted curses as the Earthmen carried the chief and the cans
of fuel back to the ship. They waved their knives and danced up and down
in a frenzy of hate.

"Let's make it fast," Fannia said, after Donnaught had fueled the ship.

He gave the chief a push and leaped in. In a second they were in the
air, heading for Thetis and the nearest bar at top speed.

The natives were hot for blood--their own. Every man of them pledged his
life to wiping out the insult to their leader and god, and to their
shrine.

But the aliens were gone. There was nobody to fight.

                                                     --ROBERT SHECKLEY




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ November 1952.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.[Illustration]


WATCHBIRD

By ROBERT SHECKLEY

Illustrated by EMSH


 _Strange how often the Millennium has been at
 hand. The idea is peace on Earth, see, and
 the way to do it is by figuring out angles._


When Gelsen entered, he saw that the rest of the watchbird manufacturers
were already present. There were six of them, not counting himself, and
the room was blue with expensive cigar smoke.

"Hi, Charlie," one of them called as he came in.

The rest broke off conversation long enough to wave a casual greeting at
him. As a watchbird manufacturer, he was a member manufacturer of
salvation, he reminded himself wryly. Very exclusive. You must have a
certified government contract if you want to save the human race.

"The government representative isn't here yet," one of the men told him.
"He's due any minute."

"We're getting the green light," another said.

"Fine." Gelsen found a chair near the door and looked around the room.
It was like a convention, or a Boy Scout rally. The six men made up for
their lack of numbers by sheer volume. The president of Southern
Consolidated was talking at the top of his lungs about watchbird's
enormous durability. The two presidents he was talking at were grinning,
nodding, one trying to interrupt with the results of a test he had run
on watchbird's resourcefulness, the other talking about the new
recharging apparatus.

The other three men were in their own little group, delivering what
sounded like a panegyric to watchbird.

Gelsen noticed that all of them stood straight and tall, like the
saviors they felt they were. He didn't find it funny. Up to a few days
ago he had felt that way himself. He had considered himself a
pot-bellied, slightly balding saint.

       *       *       *       *       *

He sighed and lighted a cigarette. At the beginning of the project, he
had been as enthusiastic as the others. He remembered saying to
Macintyre, his chief engineer, "Mac, a new day is coming. Watchbird is
the Answer." And Macintyre had nodded very profoundly--another watchbird
convert.

How wonderful it had seemed then! A simple, reliable answer to one of
mankind's greatest problems, all wrapped and packaged in a pound of
incorruptible metal, crystal and plastics.

Perhaps that was the very reason he was doubting it now. Gelsen
suspected that you don't solve human problems so easily. There had to be
a catch somewhere.

After all, murder was an old problem, and watchbird too new a solution.

"Gentlemen--" They had been talking so heatedly that they hadn't noticed
the government representative entering. Now the room became quiet at
once.

"Gentlemen," the plump government man said, "the President, with the
consent of Congress, has acted to form a watchbird division for every
city and town in the country."

The men burst into a spontaneous shout of triumph. They were going to
have their chance to save the world after all, Gelsen thought, and
worriedly asked himself what was wrong with that.

He listened carefully as the government man outlined the distribution
scheme. The country was to be divided into seven areas, each to be
supplied and serviced by one manufacturer. This meant monopoly, of
course, but a necessary one. Like the telephone service, it was in the
public's best interests. You couldn't have competition in watchbird
service. Watchbird was for everyone.

"The President hopes," the representative continued, "that full
watchbird service will be installed in the shortest possible time. You
will have top priorities on strategic metals, manpower, and so forth."

"Speaking for myself," the president of Southern Consolidated said, "I
expect to have the first batch of watchbirds distributed within the
week. Production is all set up."

       *       *       *       *       *

The rest of the men were equally ready. The factories had been prepared
to roll out the watchbirds for months now. The final standardized
equipment had been agreed upon, and only the Presidential go-ahead had
been lacking.

"Fine," the representative said. "If that is all, I think we can--is
there a question?"

"Yes, sir," Gelsen said. "I want to know if the present model is the one
we are going to manufacture."

"Of course," the representative said. "It's the most advanced."

"I have an objection." Gelsen stood up. His colleagues were glaring
coldly at him. Obviously he was delaying the advent of the golden age.

"What is your objection?" the representative asked.

"First, let me say that I am one hundred per cent in favor of a machine
to stop murder. It's been needed for a long time. I object only to the
watchbird's learning circuits. They serve, in effect, to animate the
machine and give it a pseudo-consciousness. I can't approve of that."

"But, Mr. Gelsen, you yourself testified that the watchbird would not be
completely efficient unless such circuits were introduced. Without them,
the watchbirds could stop only an estimated seventy per cent of
murders."

"I know that," Gelsen said, feeling extremely uncomfortable. "I believe
there might be a moral danger in allowing a machine to make decisions
that are rightfully Man's," he declared doggedly.

"Oh, come now, Gelsen," one of the corporation presidents said. "It's
nothing of the sort. The watchbird will only reinforce the decisions
made by honest men from the beginning of time."

"I think that is true," the representative agreed. "But I can understand
how Mr. Gelsen feels. It is sad that we must put a human problem into
the hands of a machine, sadder still that we must have a machine enforce
our laws. But I ask you to remember, Mr. Gelsen, that there is no other
possible way of stopping a murderer _before he strikes_. It would be
unfair to the many innocent people killed every year if we were to
restrict watchbird on philosophical grounds. Don't you agree that I'm
right?"

"Yes, I suppose I do," Gelsen said unhappily. He had told himself all
that a thousand times, but something still bothered him. Perhaps he
would talk it over with Macintyre.

As the conference broke up, a thought struck him. He grinned.

A lot of policemen were going to be out of work!

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now what do you think of that?" Officer Celtrics demanded. "Fifteen
years in Homicide and a machine is replacing me." He wiped a large red
hand across his forehead and leaned against the captain's desk. "Ain't
science marvelous?"

Two other policemen, late of Homicide, nodded glumly.

"Don't worry about it," the captain said. "We'll find a home for you in
Larceny, Celtrics. You'll like it here."

"I just can't get over it," Celtrics complained. "A lousy little piece
of tin and glass is going to solve all the crimes."

"Not quite," the captain said. "The watchbirds are supposed to prevent
the crimes before they happen."

"Then how'll they be crimes?" one of the policeman asked. "I mean they
can't hang you for murder until you commit one, can they?"

"That's not the idea," the captain said. "The watchbirds are supposed to
stop a man before he commits a murder."

"Then no one arrests him?" Celtrics asked.

"I don't know how they're going to work that out," the captain admitted.

The men were silent for a while. The captain yawned and examined his
watch.

"The thing I don't understand," Celtrics said, still leaning on the
captain's desk, "is just how do they do it? How did it start, Captain?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The captain studied Celtrics' face for possible irony; after all,
watchbird had been in the papers for months. But then he remembered that
Celtrics, like his sidekicks, rarely bothered to turn past the sports
pages.

"Well," the captain said, trying to remember what he had read in the
Sunday supplements, "these scientists were working on criminology. They
were studying murderers, to find out what made them tick. So they found
that murderers throw out a different sort of brain wave from ordinary
people. And their glands act funny, too. All this happens when they're
about to commit a murder. So these scientists worked out a special
machine to flash red or something when these brain waves turned on."

"Scientists," Celtrics said bitterly.

"Well, after the scientists had this machine, they didn't know what to
do with it. It was too big to move around, and murderers didn't drop in
often enough to make it flash. So they built it into a smaller unit and
tried it out in a few police stations. I think they tried one upstate.
But it didn't work so good. You couldn't get to the crime in time.
That's why they built the watchbirds."

"I don't think they'll stop no criminals," one of the policemen
insisted.

"They sure will. I read the test results. They can smell him out before
he commits a crime. And when they reach him, they give him a powerful
shock or something. It'll stop him."

"You closing up Homicide, Captain?" Celtrics asked.

"Nope," the captain said. "I'm leaving a skeleton crew in until we see
how these birds do."

"Hah," Celtrics said. "Skeleton crew. That's funny."

"Sure," the captain said. "Anyhow, I'm going to leave some men on. It
seems the birds don't stop all murders."

"Why not?"

"Some murderers don't have these brain waves," the captain answered,
trying to remember what the newspaper article had said. "Or their glands
don't work or something."

"Which ones don't they stop?" Celtrics asked, with professional
curiosity.

"I don't know. But I hear they got the damned things fixed so they're
going to stop all of them soon."

"How they working that?"

"They learn. The watchbirds, I mean. Just like people."

"You kidding me?"

"Nope."

"Well," Celtrics said, "I think I'll just keep old Betsy oiled, just in
case. You can't trust these scientists."

"Right."

"Birds!" Celtrics scoffed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Over the town, the watchbird soared in a long, lazy curve. Its aluminum
hide glistened in the morning sun, and dots of light danced on its stiff
wings. Silently it flew.

Silently, but with all senses functioning. Built-in kinesthetics told
the watchbird where it was, and held it in a long search curve. Its eyes
and ears operated as one unit, searching, seeking.

And then something happened! The watchbird's electronically fast
reflexes picked up the edge of a sensation. A correlation center tested
it, matching it with electrical and chemical data in its memory files. A
relay tripped.

Down the watchbird spiraled, coming in on the increasingly strong
sensation. It _smelled_ the outpouring of certain glands, _tasted_ a
deviant brain wave.

Fully alerted and armed, it spun and banked in the bright morning
sunlight.

Dinelli was so intent he didn't see the watchbird coming. He had his gun
poised, and his eyes pleaded with the big grocer.

"Don't come no closer."

"You lousy little punk," the grocer said, and took another step forward.
"Rob me? I'll break every bone in your puny body."

The grocer, too stupid or too courageous to understand the threat of the
gun, advanced on the little thief.

"All right," Dinelli said, in a thorough state of panic. "All right,
sucker, take--"

A bolt of electricity knocked him on his back. The gun went off,
smashing a breakfast food display.

"What in hell?" the grocer asked, staring at the stunned thief. And then
he saw a flash of silver wings. "Well, I'm really damned. Those
watchbirds work!"

He stared until, the wings disappeared in the sky. Then he telephoned
the police.

The watchbird returned to his search curve. His thinking center
correlated the new facts he had learned about murder. Several of these
he hadn't known before.

This new information was simultaneously flashed to all the other
watchbirds and their information was flashed back to him.

New information, methods, definitions were constantly passing between
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now that the watchbirds were rolling off the assembly line in a steady
stream, Gelsen allowed himself to relax. A loud contented hum filled his
plant. Orders were being filled on time, with top priorities given to
the biggest cities in his area, and working down to the smallest towns.

"All smooth, Chief," Macintyre said, coming in the door. He had just
completed a routine inspection.

"Fine. Have a seat."

The big engineer sat down and lighted a cigarette.

"We've been working on this for some time," Gelsen said, when he
couldn't think of anything else.

"We sure have," Macintyre agreed. He leaned back and inhaled deeply. He
had been one of the consulting engineers on the original watchbird. That
was six years back. He had been working for Gelsen ever since, and the
men had become good friends.

"The thing I wanted to ask you was this--" Gelsen paused. He couldn't
think how to phrase what he wanted. Instead he asked, "What do you think
of the watchbirds, Mac?"

"Who, me?" The engineer grinned nervously. He had been eating, drinking
and sleeping watchbird ever since its inception. He had never found it
necessary to have an attitude. "Why, I think it's great."

"I don't mean that," Gelsen said. He realized that what he wanted was to
have someone understand his point of view. "I mean do you figure there
might be some danger in machine thinking?"

"I don't think so, Chief. Why do you ask?"

"Look, I'm no scientist or engineer. I've just handled cost and
production and let you boys worry about how. But as a layman, watchbird
is starting to frighten me."

"No reason for that."

"I don't like the idea of the learning circuits."

"But why not?" Then Macintyre grinned again. "I know. You're like a lot
of people, Chief--afraid your machines are going to wake up and say,
'What are we doing here? Let's go out and rule the world.' Is that it?"

"Maybe something like that," Gelsen admitted.

"No chance of it," Macintyre said. "The watchbirds are complex, I'll
admit, but an M.I.T. calculator is a whole lot more complex. And it
hasn't got consciousness."

"No. But the watchbirds can _learn_."

"Sure. So can all the new calculators. Do you think they'll team up with
the watchbirds?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Gelsen felt annoyed at Macintyre, and even more annoyed at himself for
being ridiculous. "It's a fact that the watchbirds can put their
learning into action. No one is monitoring them."

"So that's the trouble," Macintyre said.

"I've been thinking of getting out of watchbird." Gelsen hadn't realized
it until that moment.

"Look, Chief," Macintyre said. "Will you take an engineer's word on
this?"

"Let's hear it."

"The watchbirds are no more dangerous than an automobile, an IBM
calculator or a thermometer. They have no more consciousness or volition
than those things. The watchbirds are built to respond to certain
stimuli, and to carry out certain operations when they receive that
stimuli."

"And the learning circuits?"

"You have to have those," Macintyre said patiently, as though
explaining the whole thing to a ten-year-old. "The purpose of the
watchbird is to frustrate all murder-attempts, right? Well, only certain
murderers give out these stimuli. In order to stop all of them, the
watchbird has to search out new definitions of murder and correlate them
with what it already knows."

"I think it's inhuman," Gelsen said.

"That's the best thing about it. The watchbirds are unemotional. Their
reasoning is non-anthropomorphic. You can't bribe them or drug them. You
shouldn't fear them, either."

The intercom on Gelsen's desk buzzed. He ignored it.

"I know all this," Gelsen said. "But, still, sometimes I feel like the
man who invented dynamite. He thought it would only be used for blowing
up tree stumps."

"_You_ didn't invent watchbird."

"I still feel morally responsible because I manufacture them."

The intercom buzzed again, and Gelsen irritably punched a button.

"The reports are in on the first week of watchbird operation," his
secretary told him.

"How do they look?"

"Wonderful, sir."

"Send them in in fifteen minutes." Gelsen switched the intercom off and
turned back to Macintyre, who was cleaning his fingernails with a wooden
match. "Don't you think that this represents a trend in human thinking?
The mechanical god? The electronic father?"

"Chief," Macintyre said, "I think you should study watchbird more
closely. Do you know what's built into the circuits?"

"Only generally."

"First, there is a purpose. Which is to stop living organisms from
committing murder. Two, murder may be defined as an act of violence,
consisting of breaking, mangling, maltreating or otherwise stopping the
functions of a living organism by a living organism. Three, most
murderers are detectable by certain chemical and electrical changes."

Macintyre paused to light another cigarette. "Those conditions take care
of the routine functions. Then, for the learning circuits, there are two
more conditions. Four, there are some living organisms who commit murder
without the signs mentioned in three. Five, these can be detected by
data applicable to condition two."

"I see," Gelsen said.

"You realize how foolproof it is?"

"I suppose so." Gelsen hesitated a moment. "I guess that's all."

"Right," the engineer said, and left.

Gelsen thought for a few moments. There _couldn't_ be anything wrong
with the watchbirds.

"Send in the reports," he said into the intercom.

       *       *       *       *       *

High above the lighted buildings of the city, the watchbird soared. It
was dark, but in the distance the watchbird could see another, and
another beyond that. For this was a large city.

To prevent murder ...

There was more to watch for now. New information had crossed the
invisible network that connected all watchbirds. New data, new ways of
detecting the violence of murder.

There! The edge of a sensation! Two watchbirds dipped simultaneously.
One had received the scent a fraction of a second before the other. He
continued down while the other resumed monitoring.

_Condition four, there are some living organisms who commit murder
without the signs mentioned in condition three._

Through his new information, the watchbird knew by extrapolation that
this organism was bent on murder, even though the characteristic
chemical and electrical smells were absent.

The watchbird, all senses acute, closed in on the organism. He found
what he wanted, and dived.

Roger Greco leaned against a building, his hands in his pockets. In his
left hand was the cool butt of a .45. Greco waited patiently.

He wasn't thinking of anything in particular, just relaxing against a
building, waiting for a man. Greco didn't know why the man was to be
killed. He didn't care. Greco's lack of curiosity was part of his value.
The other part was his skill.

One bullet, neatly placed in the head of a man he didn't know. It didn't
excite him or sicken him. It was a job, just like anything else. You
killed a man. So?

As Greco's victim stepped out of a building, Greco lifted the .45 out of
his pocket. He released the safety and braced the gun with his right
hand. He still wasn't thinking of anything as he took aim ...

And was knocked off his feet.

Greco thought he had been shot. He struggled up again, looked around,
and sighted foggily on his victim.

Again he was knocked down.

This time he lay on the ground, trying to draw a bead. He never thought
of stopping, for Greco was a craftsman.

With the next blow, everything went black. Permanently, because the
watchbird's duty was to protect the object of violence--_at whatever
cost to the murderer_.

The victim walked to his car. He hadn't noticed anything unusual.
Everything had happened in silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gelsen was feeling pretty good. The watchbirds had been operating
perfectly. Crimes of violence had been cut in half, and cut again. Dark
alleys were no longer mouths of horror. Parks and playgrounds were not
places to shun after dusk.

Of course, there were still robberies. Petty thievery flourished, and
embezzlement, larceny, forgery and a hundred other crimes.

[Illustration]

But that wasn't so important. You could regain lost money--never a lost
life.

Gelsen was ready to admit that he had been wrong about the watchbirds.
They _were_ doing a job that humans had been unable to accomplish.

The first hint of something wrong came that morning.

Macintyre came into his office. He stood silently in front of Gelsen's
desk, looking annoyed and a little embarrassed.

"What's the matter, Mac?" Gelsen asked.

"One of the watchbirds went to work on a slaughterhouse man. Knocked him
out."

Gelsen thought about it for a moment. Yes, the watchbirds would do that.
With their new learning circuits, they had probably defined the killing
of animals as murder.

"Tell the packers to mechanize their slaughtering," Gelsen said. "I
never liked that business myself."

"All right," Macintyre said. He pursed his lips, then shrugged his
shoulders and left.

Gelsen stood beside his desk, thinking. Couldn't the watchbirds
differentiate between a murderer and a man engaged in a legitimate
profession? No, evidently not. To them, murder was murder. No
exceptions. He frowned. That might take a little ironing out in the
circuits.

[Illustration]

But not too much, he decided hastily. Just make them a little more
discriminating.

He sat down again and buried himself in paperwork, trying to avoid the
edge of an old fear.

       *       *       *       *       *

They strapped the prisoner into the chair and fitted the electrode to
his leg.

"Oh, oh," he moaned, only half-conscious now of what they were doing.

They fitted the helmet over his shaved head and tightened the last
straps. He continued to moan softly.

And then the watchbird swept in. How he had come, no one knew. Prisons
are large and strong, with many locked doors, but the watchbird was
there--

To stop a murder.

"Get that thing out of here!" the warden shouted, and reached for the
switch. The watchbird knocked him down.

"Stop that!" a guard screamed, and grabbed for the switch himself. He
was knocked to the floor beside the warden.

"This isn't murder, you idiot!" another guard said. He drew his gun to
shoot down the glittering, wheeling metal bird.

Anticipating, the watchbird smashed him back against the wall.

There was silence in the room. After a while, the man in the helmet
started to giggle. Then he stopped.

The watchbird stood on guard, fluttering in mid-air--

Making sure no murder was done.

New data flashed along the watchbird network. Unmonitored, independent,
the thousands of watchbirds received and acted upon it.

_The breaking, mangling or otherwise stopping the functions of a living
organism by a living organism. New acts to stop._

"Damn you, git going!" Farmer Ollister shouted, and raised his whip
again. The horse balked, and the wagon rattled and shook as he edged
sideways.

"You lousy hunk of pigmeal, git going!" the farmer yelled and he raised
the whip again.

It never fell. An alert watchbird, sensing violence, had knocked him out
of his seat.

A living organism? What is a living organism? The watchbirds extended
their definitions as they became aware of more facts. And, of course,
this gave them more work.

The deer was just visible at the edge of the woods. The hunter raised
his rifle, and took careful aim.

He didn't have time to shoot.

       *       *       *       *       *

With his free hand, Gelsen mopped perspiration from his face. "All
right," he said into the telephone. He listened to the stream of
vituperation from the other end, then placed the receiver gently in its
cradle.

"What was that one?" Macintyre asked. He was unshaven, tie loose, shirt
unbuttoned.

"Another fisherman," Gelsen said. "It seems the watchbirds won't let
him fish even though his family is starving. What are we going to do
about it, he wants to know."

"How many hundred is that?"

"I don't know. I haven't opened the mail."

"Well, I figured out where the trouble is," Macintyre said gloomily,
with the air of a man who knows just how he blew up the Earth--after it
was too late.

"Let's hear it."

"Everybody took it for granted that we wanted all murder stopped. We
figured the watchbirds would think as we do. We ought to have qualified
the conditions."

"I've got an idea," Gelsen said, "that we'd have to know just why and
what murder is, before we could qualify the conditions properly. And if
we knew that, we wouldn't need the watchbirds."

"Oh, I don't know about that. They just have to be told that some things
which look like murder are not murder."

"But why should they stop fisherman?" Gelsen asked.

"Why shouldn't they? Fish and animals are living organisms. We just
don't think that killing them is murder."

The telephone rang. Gelsen glared at it and punched the intercom. "I
told you no more calls, no matter what."

"This is from Washington," his secretary said. "I thought you'd--"

"Sorry." Gelsen picked up the telephone. "Yes. Certainly is a mess ...
Have they? All right, I certainly will." He put down the telephone.

"Short and sweet," he told Macintyre. "We're to shut down temporarily."

"That won't be so easy," Macintyre said. "The watchbirds operate
independent of any central control, you know. They come back once a week
for a repair checkup. We'll have to turn them off then, one by one."

"Well, let's get to it. Monroe over on the Coast has shut down about a
quarter of his birds."

"I think I can dope out a restricting circuit," Macintyre said.

"Fine," Gelsen replied bitterly. "You make me very happy."

       *       *       *       *       *

The watchbirds were learning rapidly, expanding and adding to their
knowledge. Loosely defined abstractions were extended, acted upon and
re-extended.

To stop murder ...

Metal and electrons reason well, but not in a human fashion.

_A_ living organism? _Any_ living organism!

The watchbirds set themselves the task of protecting all living things.

The fly buzzed around the room, lighting on a table top, pausing a
moment, then darting to a window sill.

The old man stalked it, a rolled newspaper in his hand.

Murderer!

The watchbirds swept down and saved the fly in the nick of time.

The old man writhed on the floor a minute and then was silent. He had
been given only a mild shock, but it had been enough for his fluttery,
cranky heart.

His victim had been saved, though, and this was the important thing.
Save the victim and give the aggressor his just desserts.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gelsen demanded angrily, "Why aren't they being turned off?"

The assistant control engineer gestured. In a corner of the repair room
lay the senior control engineer. He was just regaining consciousness.

"He tried to turn one of them off," the assistant engineer said. Both
his hands were knotted together. He was making a visible effort not to
shake.

"That's ridiculous. They haven't got any sense of self-preservation."

"Then turn them off yourself. Besides, I don't think any more are going
to come."

What could have happened? Gelsen began to piece it together. The
watchbirds still hadn't decided on the limits of a living organism. When
some of them were turned off in the Monroe plant, the rest must have
correlated the data.

So they had been forced to assume that they were living organisms, as
well.

No one had ever told them otherwise. Certainly they carried on most of
the functions of living organisms.

Then the old fears hit him. Gelsen trembled and hurried out of the
repair room. He wanted to find Macintyre in a hurry.

       *       *       *       *       *

The nurse handed the surgeon the sponge.

"Scalpel."

She placed it in his hand. He started to make the first incision. And
then he was aware of a disturbance.

"Who let that thing in?"

"I don't know," the nurse said, her voice muffled by the mask.

"Get it out of here."

The nurse waved her arms at the bright winged thing, but it fluttered
over her head.

The surgeon proceeded with the incision--as long as he was able.

The watchbird drove him away and stood guard.

"Telephone the watchbird company!" the surgeon ordered. "Get them to
turn the thing off."

The watchbird was preventing violence to a living organism.

The surgeon stood by helplessly while his patient died.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fluttering high above the network of highways, the watchbird watched and
waited. It had been constantly working for weeks now, without rest or
repair. Rest and repair were impossible, because the watchbird couldn't
allow itself--a living organism--to be murdered. And that was what
happened when watchbirds returned to the factory.

There was a built-in order to return, after the lapse of a certain time
period. But the watchbird had a stronger order to obey--preservation of
life, including its own.

The definitions of murder were almost infinitely extended now,
impossible to cope with. But the watchbird didn't consider that. It
responded to its stimuli, whenever they came and whatever their source.

There was a new definition of living organism in its memory files. It
had come as a result of the watchbird discovery that watchbirds were
living organisms. And it had enormous ramifications.

The stimuli came! For the hundredth time that day, the bird wheeled and
banked, dropping swiftly down to stop murder.

Jackson yawned and pulled his car to a shoulder of the road. He didn't
notice the glittering dot in the sky. There was no reason for him to.
Jackson wasn't contemplating murder, by any human definition.

This was a good spot for a nap, he decided. He had been driving for
seven straight hours and his eyes were starting to fog. He reached out
to turn off the ignition key--

And was knocked back against the side of the car.

"What in hell's wrong with you?" he asked indignantly. "All I want to do
is--" He reached for the key again, and again he was smacked back.

Jackson knew better than to try a third time. He had been listening to
the radio and he knew what the watchbirds did to stubborn violators.

"You mechanical jerk," he said to the waiting metal bird. "A car's not
alive. I'm not trying to kill it."

But the watchbird only knew that a certain operation resulted in
stopping an organism. The car was certainly a functioning organism.
Wasn't it of metal, as were the watchbirds? Didn't it run?

       *       *       *       *       *

Macintyre said, "Without repairs they'll run down." He shoved a pile of
specification sheets out of his way.

"How soon?" Gelsen asked.

"Six months to a year. Say a year, barring accidents."

"A year," Gelsen said. "In the meantime, everything is stopping dead. Do
you know the latest?"

"What?"

"The watchbirds have decided that the Earth is a living organism. They
won't allow farmers to break ground for plowing. And, of course,
everything else is a living organism--rabbits, beetles, flies, wolves,
mosquitoes, lions, crocodiles, crows, and smaller forms of life such as
bacteria."

"I know," Macintyre said.

"And you tell me they'll wear out in six months or a year. What happens
_now_? What are we going to eat in six months?"

The engineer rubbed his chin. "We'll have to do something quick and
fast. Ecological balance is gone to hell."

"Fast isn't the word. Instantaneously would be better." Gelsen lighted
his thirty-fifth cigarette for the day. "At least I have the bitter
satisfaction of saying, 'I told you so.' Although I'm just as
responsible as the rest of the machine-worshipping fools."

Macintyre wasn't listening. He was thinking about watchbirds. "Like the
rabbit plague in Australia."

"The death rate is mounting," Gelsen said. "Famine. Floods. Can't cut
down trees. Doctors can't--what was that you said about Australia?"

"The rabbits," Macintyre repeated. "Hardly any left in Australia now."

"Why? How was it done?"

"Oh, found some kind of germ that attacked only rabbits. I think it was
propagated by mosquitos--"

"Work on that," Gelsen said. "You might have something. I want you to
get on the telephone, ask for an emergency hookup with the engineers of
the other companies. Hurry it up. Together you may be able to dope out
something."

"Right," Macintyre said. He grabbed a handful of blank paper and hurried
to the telephone.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What did I tell you?" Officer Celtrics said. He grinned at the captain.
"Didn't I tell you scientists were nuts?"

"I didn't say you were wrong, did I?" the captain asked.

"No, but you weren't _sure_."

"Well, I'm sure now. You'd better get going. There's plenty of work for
you."

"I know." Celtrics drew his revolver from its holster, checked it and
put it back. "Are all the boys back, Captain?"

"All?" the captain laughed humorlessly. "Homicide has increased by fifty
per cent. There's more murder now than there's ever been."

"Sure," Celtrics said. "The watchbirds are too busy guarding cars and
slugging spiders." He started toward the door, then turned for a parting
shot.

"Take my word, Captain. Machines are _stupid_."

The captain nodded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thousands of watchbirds, trying to stop countless millions of murders--a
hopeless task. But the watchbirds didn't hope. Without consciousness,
they experienced no sense of accomplishment, no fear of failure.
Patiently they went about their jobs, obeying each stimulus as it came.

They couldn't be everywhere at the same time, but it wasn't necessary to
be. People learned quickly what the watchbirds didn't like and refrained
from doing it. It just wasn't safe. With their high speed and superfast
senses, the watchbirds got around quickly.

And now they meant business. In their original directives there had been
a provision made for killing a murderer, if all other means failed.

Why spare a murderer?

It backfired. The watchbirds extracted the fact that murder and crimes
of violence had increased geometrically since they had begun operation.
This was true, because their new definitions increased the possibilities
of murder. But to the watchbirds, the rise showed that the first methods
had failed.

Simple logic. If A doesn't work, try B. The watchbirds shocked to kill.

Slaughterhouses in Chicago stopped and cattle starved to death in their
pens, because farmers in the Midwest couldn't cut hay or harvest grain.

No one had told the watchbirds that all life depends on carefully
balanced murders.

Starvation didn't concern the watchbirds, since it was an act of
omission.

Their interest lay only in acts of commission.

Hunters sat home, glaring at the silver dots in the sky, longing to
shoot them down. But for the most part, they didn't try. The watchbirds
were quick to sense the murder intent and to punish it.

Fishing boats swung idle at their moorings in San Pedro and Gloucester.
Fish were living organisms.

Farmers cursed and spat and died, trying to harvest the crop. Grain was
alive and thus worthy of protection. Potatoes were as important to the
watchbird as any other living organism. The death of a blade of grass
was equal to the assassination of a President--

To the watchbirds.

And, of course, certain machines were living. This followed, since the
watchbirds were machines and living.

God help you if you maltreated your radio. Turning it off meant killing
it. Obviously--its voice was silenced, the red glow of its tubes faded,
it grew cold.

The watchbirds tried to guard their other charges. Wolves were
slaughtered, trying to kill rabbits. Rabbits were electrocuted, trying
to eat vegetables. Creepers were burned out in the act of strangling
trees.

A butterfly was executed, caught in the act of outraging a rose.

This control was spasmodic, because of the fewness of the watchbirds. A
billion watchbirds couldn't have carried out the ambitious project set
by the thousands.

The effect was of a murderous force, ten thousand bolts of irrational
lightning raging around the country, striking a thousand times a day.

Lightning which anticipated your moves and punished your intentions.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Gentlemen, _please_," the government representative begged. "We must
hurry."

The seven manufacturers stopped talking.

"Before we begin this meeting formally," the president of Monroe said,
"I want to say something. We do not feel ourselves responsible for this
unhappy state of affairs. It was a government project; the government
must accept the responsibility, both moral and financial."

Gelsen shrugged his shoulders. It was hard to believe that these men,
just a few weeks ago, had been willing to accept the glory of saving the
world. Now they wanted to shrug off the responsibility when the
salvation went amiss.

"I'm positive that that need not concern us now," the representative
assured him. "We must hurry. You engineers have done an excellent job. I
am proud of the cooperation you have shown in this emergency. You are
hereby empowered to put the outlined plan into action."

"Wait a minute," Gelsen said.

"There is no time."

"The plan's no good."

"Don't you think it will work?"

"Of course it will work. But I'm afraid the cure will be worse than the
disease."

The manufacturers looked as though they would have enjoyed throttling
Gelsen. He didn't hesitate.

"Haven't we learned yet?" he asked. "Don't you see that you can't cure
human problems by mechanization?"

"Mr. Gelsen," the president of Monroe said, "I would enjoy hearing you
philosophize, but, unfortunately, people are being killed. Crops are
being ruined. There is famine in some sections of the country already.
The watchbirds must be stopped at once!"

"Murder must be stopped, too. I remember all of us agreeing upon that.
But this is not the way!"

"What would you suggest?" the representative asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gelsen took a deep breath. What he was about to say took all the courage
he had.

"Let the watchbirds run down by themselves," Gelsen suggested.

There was a near-riot. The government representative broke it up.

"Let's take our lesson," Gelsen urged, "admit that we were wrong trying
to cure human problems by mechanical means. Start again. Use machines,
yes, but not as judges and teachers and fathers."

"Ridiculous," the representative said coldly. "Mr. Gelsen, you are
overwrought. I suggest you control yourself." He cleared his throat.
"All of you are ordered by the President to carry out the plan you have
submitted." He looked sharply at Gelsen. "Not to do so will be treason."

"I'll cooperate to the best of my ability," Gelsen said.

"Good. Those assembly lines must be rolling within the week."

Gelsen walked out of the room alone. Now he was confused again. Had he
been right or was he just another visionary? Certainly, he hadn't
explained himself with much clarity.

Did he know what he meant?

Gelsen cursed under his breath. He wondered why he couldn't ever be sure
of anything. Weren't there any values he could hold on to?

He hurried to the airport and to his plant.

       *       *       *       *       *

The watchbird was operating erratically now. Many of its delicate parts
were out of line, worn by almost continuous operation. But gallantly it
responded when the stimuli came.

A spider was attacking a fly. The watchbird swooped down to the rescue.

Simultaneously, it became aware of something overhead. The watchbird
wheeled to meet it.

There was a sharp crackle and a power bolt whizzed by the watchbird's
wing. Angrily, it spat a shock wave.

[Illustration]

The attacker was heavily insulated. Again it spat at the watchbird. This
time, a bolt smashed through a wing, the watchbird darted away, but the
attacker went after it in a burst of speed, throwing out more crackling
power.

The watchbird fell, but managed to send out its message. Urgent! A new
menace to living organisms and this was the deadliest yet!

Other watchbirds around the country integrated the message. Their
thinking centers searched for an answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, Chief, they bagged fifty today," Macintyre said, coming into
Gelsen's office.

"Fine," Gelsen said, not looking at the engineer.

"Not so fine." Macintyre sat down. "Lord, I'm tired! It was seventy-two
yesterday."

"I know." On Gelsen's desk were several dozen lawsuits, which he was
sending to the government with a prayer.

"They'll pick up again, though," Macintyre said confidently. "The Hawks
are especially built to hunt down watchbirds. They're stronger, faster,
and they've got better armor. We really rolled them out in a hurry,
huh?"

"We sure did."

"The watchbirds are pretty good, too," Macintyre had to admit. "They're
learning to take cover. They're trying a lot of stunts. You know, each
one that goes down tells the others something."

Gelsen didn't answer.

"But anything the watchbirds can do, the Hawks can do better," Macintyre
said cheerfully. "The Hawks have special learning circuits for hunting.
They're more flexible than the watchbirds. They learn faster."

Gelsen gloomily stood up, stretched, and walked to the window. The sky
was blank. Looking out, he realized that his uncertainties were over.
Right or wrong, he had made up his mind.

"Tell me," he said, still watching the sky, "what will the Hawks hunt
after they get all the watchbirds?"

"Huh?" Macintyre said. "Why--"

"Just to be on the safe side, you'd better design something to hunt down
the Hawks. Just in case, I mean."

"You think--"

[Illustration]

"All I know is that the Hawks are self-controlled. So were the
watchbirds. Remote control would have been too slow, the argument went
on. The idea was to get the watchbirds and get them fast. That meant no
restricting circuits."

"We can dope something out," Macintyre said uncertainly.

"You've got an aggressive machine up in the air now. A murder machine.
Before that it was an anti-murder machine. Your next gadget will have to
be even more self-sufficient, won't it?"

Macintyre didn't answer.

"I don't hold you responsible," Gelsen said. "It's me. It's everyone."

In the air outside was a swift-moving dot.

"That's what comes," said Gelsen, "of giving a machine the job that was
our own responsibility."

       *       *       *       *       *

Overhead, a Hawk was zeroing in on a watchbird.

The armored murder machine had learned a lot in a few days. Its sole
function was to kill. At present it was impelled toward a certain type
of living organism, metallic like itself.

But the Hawk had just discovered that there were other types of living
organisms, too--

Which had to be murdered.

                                                     --ROBERT SHECKLEY




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ February 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.